RESEARCH ARTICLE                            A Self‐Supervised Learning Framework for Seismic Low‐
10.1029/2024JH000157
                                            Frequency Extrapolation
Key Points:                                 Shijun Cheng1      , Yi Wang2,3, Qingchen Zhang3          , Randy Harsuko1, and Tariq Alkhalifah1
• We develop a self‐supervised seismic
  low‐frequency extrapolation algorithm     1
                                             Division of Physical Science and Engineering, King Abdullah University of Science and Technology, Thuwal, Saudi
  that can be applied to exploration and
                                            Arabia, 2Shandong Key Laboratory of Mining Disaster Prevention and Control, Shandong University of Science and
  earthquake seismograms
• The predicted low‐frequencies can help    Technology, Qingdao, China, 3Research Center for Computational and Exploration Geophysics, State Key Laboratory of
  fill in the model the wavenumber          Geodesy and Earth's Dynamics, Innovation Academy for Precision Measurement Science and Technology, Chinese
  spectrum and help avoid cycle‐            Academy of Sciences, Wuhan, China
  skipping in full waveform inversion
• Our method, by integrating a self‐
  supervised denoiser, is robust against
  noisy observed data
                                            Abstract Full waveform inversion (FWI) is capable of generating high‐resolution subsurface parameter
                                            models, but it is susceptible to cycle‐skipping when the data lack low‐frequency components. Unfortunately,
                                            such components (<5.0 Hz) are often tainted by noise in real seismic exploration, which hinders the application
Correspondence to:                          of FWI. To address this issue, we develop a novel self‐supervised low‐frequency extrapolation method that does
Q. Zhang,
qczh@whigg.ac.cn
                                            not require labeled data, enabling neural networks to be trained directly on real data. In the proposed approach,
                                            the neural network training is divided into two stages: warm‐up and iterative data refinement (IDR). In the IDR
                                            stage, the pseudo‐labels for the current epoch are derived from the predictions made by the network trained in
Citation:
                                            the previous epoch on the original observed data. The IDR stage gradually narrows the gap between the
Cheng, S., Wang, Y., Zhang, Q., Harsuko,
R., & Alkhalifah, T. (2024). A self‐        predicted pseudo‐label and the ideal ground truth, thereby enhancing the network's low‐frequency extrapolation
supervised learning framework for seismic   performance. This paradigm effectively addresses the significant generalization gap often encountered using
low‐frequency extrapolation. Journal of
                                            supervised learning techniques, which are typically trained on synthetic data. We validate the effectiveness of
Geophysical Research: Machine Learning
and Computation, 1, e2024JH000157.          our method on both synthetic and field data. The results demonstrate that our method effectively extrapolates
https://doi.org/10.1029/2024JH000157        low‐frequency components, aiding in circumventing the challenges of cycle‐skipping in FWI. Meanwhile, by
                                            integrating a self‐supervised denoiser, our method effectively and simultaneously performs denoising and low‐
Received 31 JAN 2024
Accepted 13 JUN 2024
                                            frequency extrapolation on noisy data. Furthermore, we showcase the potential application of our method in
                                            extending the ultralow frequency components of the large‐scale collected earthquake seismogram.
Author Contributions:
Conceptualization: Shijun Cheng             Plain Language Summary Full waveform inversion (FWI) is a method used to provide detailed
Investigation: Yi Wang, Qingchen Zhang,     underground images for efforts in oil exploration or studying earthquakes. However, the method is prone to a
Randy Harsuko
Methodology: Shijun Cheng
                                            problem known as “cycle‐skipping,” caused by the lack of low frequencies in the data, and as a result, the
Supervision: Tariq Alkhalifah               inversion converges to an inaccurate velocity model. We propose a new way to extrapolate the low‐frequency
Validation: Qingchen Zhang                  components using a neural network‐based self‐supervised approach. This means our method learns directly
Writing – original draft: Shijun Cheng
Writing – review & editing: Yi Wang,
                                            from real data rather than relying on artificially created data, which is a common limitation in the supervised
Qingchen Zhang, Randy Harsuko,              paradigm. Our method not only helps to overcome the issue of skipping cycles but also demonstrates robustness
Tariq Alkhalifah                            against noisy data, enhancing its practical application potential. The tests on exploration data validate its ability
                                            to predict the low‐frequency components, helping to avoid local minima and thus improving the accuracy of
                                            FWI. Also, we demonstrate how our method can be applied to invert earthquake data, where it can extend the
                                            ultralow frequency information. This research could contribute to providing a better and a more reliable way to
                                            obtain images of the Earth's interior.


                                            1. Introduction
                                            Full waveform inversion (FWI) can provide a high‐resolution subsurface parameter model by minimizing the
© 2024 The Author(s). Journal of            misfit between observed and modeled seismic waveforms. This approach has drawn a lot of attention (Anderson
Geophysical Research: Machine Learning      et al., 2012; Ben‐Hadj‐Ali et al., 2011; Choi & Alkhalifah, 2012; Guo & Alkhalifah, 2017; Q. Zhang et al., 2014,
and Computation published by Wiley
Periodicals LLC on behalf of American       2016, 2018) since it was proposed by Tarantola (1984, 1986). However, one common problem for FWI is the high
Geophysical Union.                          nonlinearity of the problem, resulting in many local minima in its objective function, which can prevent the
This is an open access article under the    algorithm from converging to the global minimum. To address this problem, various strategies and algorithms
terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution License, which permits use,     have been developed to help eliminate or escape local minima in FWI.
distribution and reproduction in any
medium, provided the original work is       Bunks et al. (1995) introduced a multiscale strategy that initiates the process with the lowest frequencies available
properly cited.                             in the data and then progressively adds higher frequencies to the inversion. This method, applied widely, attempts


CHENG ET AL.                                                                                                                                               1 of 32
                                                                                                                                         29935210, 2024, 3, Downloaded from https://agupubs.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1029/2024JH000157, Wiley Online Library on [11/01/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
               JGR: Machine Learning and Computation                                                  10.1029/2024JH000157


                 to help FWI avoid local minima. It accomplishes this goal by smoothing the objective function in the early stages
                 and subsequently allows higher resolution information as the inversion advances. Following this work, Boo-
                 nyasiriwat et al. (2009) provided an optimal multiscale frequency selection algorithm to achieve computational
                 efficiency in the time domain. Besides, Gao et al. (2019) and Z. Ren and Liu (2015) also attempted to refine the
                 multiscale algorithm to improve the inversion quality of FWI. Nevertheless, these methods do not address the
                 issue of the lack of low frequencies in the data.
                 In order to build the long‐wavelength components of the subsurface parameter model in the case of lacking low
                 frequencies, Ha and Shin (2012) and Kim et al. (2013) proposed the Laplace‐domain waveform inversion.
                 However, this method has the drawback that the artificial low frequencies it generates due to the Laplace damping
                 applies mainly to the early arrivals. Hence, numerous studies were aimed to adjust the norm of the misfit function
                 to minimize the occurrence of local minima. Ma and Hale (2013) utilized the dynamic warping algorithm,
                 mitigating FWI's reliance on an accurate initial model by estimating the travel time shift between observed and
                 synthetic data. Pointed out by Luo and Wu (2015) and R.‐S. Wu et al. (2014), the seismic data's envelope
                 potentially provides ultralow frequency representation of the signals, offering an avenue to estimate long‐
                 wavelength velocity structures even in the absence of low‐frequency information. Furthermore, Warner and
                 Guasch (2016) introduced the adaptive waveform inversion (AWI) to counter the cycle‐skipping problem. This
                 method employs a convolutional filter as a measure of matching between the predicted data and observed data. Y.
                 Yang and Engquist (2018) and Y. Yang et al. (2018) explored the optimal transport approach, measuring
                 amplitude differences and global phase shifts and offering a solution to circumvent cycle‐skipping issues. B. Sun
                 and Alkhalifah (2019) showed that AWI is part of a more general framework based on matching filters and
                 optimal transport. Leveraging well logging data, Q. Li et al. (2022) devised a structure‐guided interpolation
                 algorithm to construct the background velocity model for FWI. J. Yao and Wang (2022) crafted a full‐waveform
                 inversion starting model from wells, employing dynamic time warping and convolutional neural networks
                 (CNNs). Another prominent technique for velocity model construction is the reflection waveform inversion
                 (RWI) (Xu et al., 2012), requiring migration and demigration to update the wavepath. RWI typically incorporates
                 a correlation‐type objective function to address amplitude challenges encountered without true amplitude
                 (Alkhalifah & Wu, 2016; Chi et al., 2015; Guo & Alkhalifah, 2017; G. Wang et al., 2018; Z. Wu & Alkhali-
                 fah, 2017; G. Yao et al., 2020; Z.‐D. Zhang & Alkhalifah, 2019). However, RWI demands significantly higher
                 computational resources compared to conventional FWI methods.
                 Recently, machine learning has demonstrated significant potential in the field of seismic processing due to its
                 ability to approximate any nonlinear function (Cheng, Shi, et al., 2023; Cheng et al., 2024; Harsuko & Alkha-
                 lifah, 2022; Mousavi & Beroza, 2022; X. Wu et al., 2019; Yu et al., 2019), which also showed a potential in
                 velocity model building. As a result, some researchers have proposed replacing traditional physics‐based FWI
                 with CNNs to directly learn a mapping from seismic data to velocity models in a data‐driven manner (Araya‐Polo
                 et al., 2018; Du et al., 2022; S. Li et al., 2020). These trained CNN models can then be applied directly to unseen
                 test data to predict velocity models. Typically, the training of such CNNs requires a large data set and is conducted
                 in a supervised learning manner. For example, F. Yang and Ma (2019) employed the classic U‐Net network
                 architecture as a baseline, trained it on a self‐constructed data set, and then tested it on 2D‐simulated models and
                 the SEG salt model, demonstrating its potential in constructing velocity models. Y. Wu and Lin (2019) integrated
                 a CNN with a conditional random field to form a hybrid network model, aiming to enhance the network's ability to
                 refine the velocity fields near faults and boundaries. W. Zhang and Gao (2021) suggested the use of images in the
                 common‐shot domain, replacing shot gathers, and then established an iterative deep CNN to produce high‐
                 resolution velocity models. S. Yang et al. (2023) also utilized low‐resolution velocity models, images, and
                 well velocity constraints to reconstruct high‐resolution velocity models. While these data‐driven approaches offer
                 a new direction for seismic inversion, they often encounter challenges in generalization due to the complexity of
                 real subsurface structures and property distributions. Moreover, the constructed training data sets often fail to
                 cover real underground features. To address the lack of physical interpretability of purely data‐driven approaches,
                 some researchers have proposed integrating a forward simulator based on the wave equation into the neural
                 network (NN)‐based seismic inversion (P. Jin et al., 2021; Lin et al., 2023; Y. Ren et al., 2021). This simulator is
                 employed to forward model the subsurface properties predicted by the NN. The discrepancy between the resulting
                 seismic records and the original observations is then used as a misfit to update the network. This approach not
                 only eliminates the need for labeled data but also enhances generalization to some extent. However, these
                 methods have not yet achieved satisfactory results on field data and often face challenges, such as unclear



CHENG ET AL.                                                                                                                  2 of 32
                                                                                                                                           29935210, 2024, 3, Downloaded from https://agupubs.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1029/2024JH000157, Wiley Online Library on [11/01/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
               JGR: Machine Learning and Computation                                                    10.1029/2024JH000157


                 inversion boundaries and overly blurred background velocities in situations when low‐frequencies are absent (F.
                 Yang & Ma, 2019).

                 Instead of using NNs to approximate an inversion operator, we can leverage them for low‐frequency extrapolation
                 and thus extend the low‐frequency information of observed data. Compared to the daunting task of directly
                 approximating the inversion operator with NNs, using them to learn low‐frequency extension might be more
                 realistic. Some researchers have initiated preliminary investigations along these lines and applied this concept
                 within FWI. Ovcharenko et al. (2017) were among the first to suggest using a feed‐forward artificial neural
                 network (ANN) to approximate the nonlinear relationship between frequency‐wavenumber spectra with limited
                 bandwidth and the low‐frequency data and, thus, recovering low‐frequency information. To tackle the inherent
                 challenge of ANNs, wherein the number of trainable parameters surges with increasing input data, Ovcharenko
                 et al. (2019) further transitioned from ANNs to CNNs and applied it for low‐frequency extrapolation in multi‐
                 offset seismic data. Instead of working in the frequency‐wavenumber domain, H. Sun and Demanet (2018,
                 2020) proposed using a CNN to directly reconstruct low‐frequency components trace‐by‐trace from band‐limited
                 data in the time domain. Furthermore, H. Sun and Demanet (2021) extended their proposed framework to the low‐
                 frequency extrapolation of multicomponent elastic wave data. Hu et al. (2021) and Y. Jin et al. (2021) developed
                 progressive transfer learning algorithms, which embed a physics‐based FWI module to iteratively update the
                 training data set, thereby reducing the feature discrepancy between the training data set and the test data set. These
                 studies have provided validation of the feasibility of using NNs for seismic data's low‐frequency extrapolation.
                 However, they only tested on synthetic data and rarely showcased applications on field data. Thus, the perfor-
                 mance on field data is our ultimate goal.
                 Achieving good low‐frequency extension results on field data using data‐driven methods remains a challenge.
                 Consequently, relatively little attention has been devoted to enhancing the performance of NNs in low‐frequency
                 extrapolation on field data. Fabien‐Ouellet (2020) utilized recurrent CNN to simultaneously achieve seismic
                 denoising and low‐frequency generation, validating the method's performance on both synthetic and field data.
                 Additionally, Nakayama and Blacquière (2021) developed a multitask seismic processing framework based on
                 NNs, capable of concurrently suppressing the blending noise, interpolating missing traces, and recovering low‐
                 frequency information. Fang et al. (2020) employed a CNN architecture based on convolutional autoencoders to
                 learn the relationship between low‐frequency and high‐frequency data, thereby predicting low‐frequency com-
                 ponents from high‐frequency data. They showcased the effectiveness of low‐frequency recovery in land field data
                 and conducted a comparative analysis between FWI and reverse time migration (RTM) products using both the
                 original data set and the data set enhanced with NN‐predicted low‐frequency components. In a similar vein, Z.
                 Wang et al. (2022) applied a dense CNN methodology to broaden the low‐frequency spectrum of prestack vis-
                 coacoustic seismic data, yielding promising outcomes when tested on marine field data. Ovcharenko et al. (2022)
                 developed a multitask processing framework, which not only recovers low‐frequency information but also pro-
                 vides a smooth subsurface background model. This was applied to marine data involving the elastic assumption.
                 Although these methods have demonstrated a certain ability in recovering low frequencies on field data, their
                 performance significantly lags behind their results on synthetic data. This discrepancy is attributed to their reliance
                 on a supervised learning approach where training occurs solely on synthetic data before being directly applied to
                 field data. It is evident that field and synthetic data have considerable feature differences due to physical ap-
                 proximations made during synthetic data generation. Consequently, the features captured by the NN on synthetic
                 data do not generalize well when applied to field data. To bridge the feature gap between the synthetic and field data,
                 Alkhalifah et al. (2022) introduced a domain adaptation method, namely MLReal, which embeds real features of
                 field data into synthetic data to enhance low‐frequency extrapolation performance on field data. However, this
                 preprocessing‐based approach does not address the potential shift in labels between the synthetic and field data.
                 Therefore, a more viable alternative is to train directly on field data. It allows the network to extract frequency
                 features from field data more directly and thus, contributes to low‐frequency tasks on field data.
                 Indeed, predicting low‐frequency data using unsupervised learning poses significant challenges. To our
                 knowledge, we have only come across two studies addressing this issue. One study by H. Sun et al. (2023)
                 developed a semi‐supervised learning approach by incorporating a domain adaptation approach. They trained a
                 generative model, CycleGAN, using synthetic low‐frequency shot gathers and paired field band‐limited shot
                 gathers. The trained CycleGAN demonstrated its capability to extrapolate low‐frequency components during
                 testing on field data. However, during its training phase, CycleGAN still captures features inherent to the syn-
                 thetic data, which might pose generalization issues when predicting field data. For instance, field data may exhibit


CHENG ET AL.                                                                                                                    3 of 32
                                                                                                                                        29935210, 2024, 3, Downloaded from https://agupubs.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1029/2024JH000157, Wiley Online Library on [11/01/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
               JGR: Machine Learning and Computation                                                  10.1029/2024JH000157


                 anisotropic effects, but synthetic data simulated under the isotropic assumption may not accurately represent the
                 field data. In addition, training CycleGANs is not trivial. Since it requires simultaneous training of both
                 discriminator and generator models, it relies on expert tuning and hyperparameter selection. Another approach
                 was proposed by M. Wang et al. (2020), employing a self‐supervised learning (SSL) method for low‐frequency
                 extension of seismic data. They first trained an NN using paired seismic data sets missing the low‐frequency
                 components. These paired data sets share the same high‐frequency cutoff but differ in their low‐frequency
                 components. The data set with the relative low‐frequency component, sourced from original data, serves as la-
                 bels. In contrast, the data devoid of the relative low‐frequency components, achieved by filtering out the low‐
                 frequency part from the original data, acts as the NN's input. Subsequently, they employed the trained
                 network to generate low‐frequency components. However, since the training data for this method only extracts
                 labels from the original data missing low frequencies, its performance in low‐frequency reconstruction relies on
                 the low‐frequency range of the original seismic data. Moreover, downsampling significantly reduces the time
                 sampling length of the seismic data, leading to a loss of high‐frequency information and a consequent decline in
                 time resolution.
                 In line with the work by M. Wang et al. (2020), our study introduces a Lesslow2Low (L2L) framework. This
                 approach involves applying a high‐pass filter to the initial observed seismic data, which already lack low‐
                 frequency components, thereby creating input data with even fewer low‐frequency contents. The original
                 observed data serve as pseudo‐labels. In fact, the initial inspiration for L2L came from the classic denoising
                 algorithm Noisier2Noise (Moran et al., 2020), which adds noise to the original noisy data to create data with
                 stronger noise. This noisier data is considered as input, while the original noisy data acts as pseudo‐labels,
                 allowing the network to be trained in an SSL fashion. The subtle distinction between the L2L framework and the
                 method of M. Wang et al. (2020) lies in our ability to apply high‐pass filters with varying cutoff frequencies
                 during the epoch progression as opposed to a fixed approach. However, the L2L framework also faces similar
                 problems: the network's low‐frequency extrapolation performance is limited by the low‐frequency range of the
                 original observed data. We present an example that substantiates this point and leads to two important findings:
                 (a) The reason for the L2L framework's limited performance, compared to the supervised learning method, is the
                 frequency information bias between the training set employed in L2L and that used in the supervised learning
                 method. (b) The NN, which is trained using the L2L framework, demonstrates a certain degree of low‐frequency
                 extension capability with the original observed data. Although this capability is limited, if we can iteratively
                 refine the frequency information bias between the original observed data and the ideal ground truth, we can
                 gradually approach the low‐frequency extrapolation performance of the supervised learning method.

                 Motivated by these findings, we develop an effective SSL low‐frequency extrapolation algorithm and apply it to
                 FWI. In our approach, the NN training is divided into two stages: warm‐up and iterative data refinement (IDR).
                 The difference between these stages lies in the training sets used. During the warm‐up stage, the original observed
                 data act as the pseudo‐labels, and the input data are generated by applying a high‐pass filter to the observed data.
                 In the IDR stage, the pseudo‐labels for the current epoch are derived from the predictions made by the network
                 trained in the previous epoch on the original observed data, and the input data are obtained by high‐pass filtering
                 these predicted pseudo‐labels. The warm‐up stage, which precedes the IDR stage, aids in stabilizing the network
                 and initially capturing data characteristics, thus providing some degree of low‐frequency extrapolation capability.
                 The IDR stage gradually narrows the gap between the predicted pseudo‐label and the ideal ground truth, thereby
                 enhancing the network's low‐frequency extrapolation performance. We first conduct tests on synthetic data to
                 validate the effectiveness of our method and the ability to avoid cycle‐skipping local minima. Subsequently, we
                 explore the application potential of our method in exploration field data to improve the accuracy of FWI. Lastly,
                 we implement our algorithm on extensive earthquake seismogram data to conduct low‐frequency extrapolation
                 testing, assessing its capability to extend the spectrum to extremely low‐frequency components.


                 2. Method
                 2.1. FWI
                 FWI utilizes the whole waveform information (amplitude and travel time) of seismic data, and thus, it can
                 construct a high‐resolution subsurface model by iteratively minimizing the misfit between observed and simu-
                 lated data, which is superior to the high‐frequency approximated travel‐time tomography algorithms (Fichtner
                 et al., 2013). The conventional misfit objective function is given by the l2 norm as follows:


CHENG ET AL.                                                                                                                 4 of 32
                                                                                                                                                29935210, 2024, 3, Downloaded from https://agupubs.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1029/2024JH000157, Wiley Online Library on [11/01/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
               JGR: Machine Learning and Computation                                                               10.1029/2024JH000157



                                                               1⃦                               ⃦2
                                                         χ(m) = ⃦dobs (xr ,xs ) − dsyn (xr ,xs )⃦2 ,                                      (1)
                                                               2
                 where the superscripts obs and syn denote the observed and simulated seismic data, respectively, xr and xs
                 represent the coordinates of the receivers and sources, respectively. FWI attempts to find a medium capable of
                 generating simulated data that closely align with the observed ones. Since FWI is a waveform matching process,
                 there would be mismatching problems between the simulated and observed seismograms when the initial model is
                 poor, leading to a time delay greater than T/2 (where T is the period of a wavelength), that is, the so‐called cycle‐
                 skipping problem. The poor initial model often leads FWI to local minima.

                 In order to overcome this problem, researchers have proposed many of the aforementioned algorithms, mostly by
                 modifying the misfit function norm (Ma & Hale, 2013; Warner & Guasch, 2016; R.‐S. Wu et al., 2014; Y. Yang &
                 Engquist, 2018; Yong et al., 2023). Actually, the root cause of the cycle‐skipping problem is the velocity model
                 lacking the long‐wavelength components, which are often constructed with the low‐frequency data information
                 (Virieux & Operto, 2009). If we cannot incorporate the low‐frequency content into the inversion process, the
                 algorithm converges to a solution that merely fits the available high‐frequency data without accurately repre-
                 senting the true subsurface structure (i.e., falling into local minimums). To address this challenge and to ensure the
                 inversion produces reliable results, it is imperative to incorporate comprehensive low‐frequency information into
                 the inversion process. Unfortunately, in real seismic exploration, data with frequencies below 5 Hz are usually
                 contaminated with noise, thus rendering unusable low‐frequency data. Unlike the aforementioned methods, we
                 try to predict the low‐frequency data information for the observed data using an innovative machine learning
                 algorithm.

                 To enhance our focus on the phase information and to avoid the amplitude challenge, we adopt a convolution‐
                 based misfit function (Choi & Alkhalifah, 2011), which has a similar performance to the correlative norm in RWI.

                                              1⃦                                                                     ⃦2
                                        χ(m) = ⃦dobs (xr ,xs ) ∗ dsyn (xref ,xs ) − dsyn (xr ,xs ) ∗ dobs (xref ,xs )⃦2 ,                 (2)
                                              2

                 where the subscript ref denotes a reference trace, which is selected from the near‐offset traces with a high signal‐
                 to‐noise ratio. Moreover, to improve the robustness against background noise, we further introduce a hybrid‐norm
                 objective function into Equation 2 (Q. Zhang et al., 2016):

                                                                     √̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅
                                                                              ⃦                       ⃦
                                                                              ⃦△d̂(xr ,xs )⃦2
                                                        χhybrid (m) = 1 +                                   − 1,                          (3)
                                                                                          ϵ2

                                        obs             syn              obs         syn
                 where △d̂(xr ,xs ) = d̂ (xr ,xs ) − d̂ (xr ,xs ) , d̂ and d̂ represent the first and second convolution terms in
                 Equation 2. As for the damping coefficient, we follow the criterion as follows (Q. Zhang et al., 2016)

                                                                                   ⃒ obs ⃒
                                                                     ϵ = c ⋅ mean( ⃒d̂ ⃒),                                                (4)

                 where c is a constant ranging between 0.1 and 100.0. The smaller c is the greater the added gain to the weak signal,
                 which helps enhance the robustness of FWI to noise.


                 2.2. Supervised Low‐Frequency Extrapolation
                 When seismic waves travel through the Earth's interior, the stratigraphic filtering effect restricts the frequency
                 content of the observed data. Meanwhile, due to limitations in the acquisition system, the recorded data not only
                 suffer from contamination by environmental noise but also include system noise from the sensors themselves,
                 which mainly affects the low frequencies. Therefore, the recorded seismic data can be expressed as follows:

                                                                      dobs = H[dreal ] + n,                                               (5)

                 where dobs represents the observed data with an absence of low‐frequency components, H[·] symbolizes the high‐
                 pass filter effect on the seismic waves, dreal denotes the broad band ground‐truth data, and n represents the noise.


CHENG ET AL.                                                                                                                       5 of 32
                                                                                                                                           29935210, 2024, 3, Downloaded from https://agupubs.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1029/2024JH000157, Wiley Online Library on [11/01/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
               JGR: Machine Learning and Computation                                                    10.1029/2024JH000157


                 The feasibility of an NN‐based data‐driven approach for low‐frequency extrapolation has been validated
                 (Ovcharenko et al., 2019; H. Sun & Demanet, 2020). Generally, we can employ the supervised learning technique
                 to train an NN that provides nonlinear mapping. This mapping translates data restricted in frequency bandwidth,
                 particularly lacking in low‐frequency components, to a data set that encompasses the low‐frequency components.
                 We can represent this operation as follows:

                                                                  dreal = NN( dobs ,θ),                                             (6)

                 where θ is the learnable parameter of network NN. Due to the unavailability of labels in field data, a synthetic data
                 set is typically constructed to facilitate the training of the NN.

                 2.3. LessLow2Low
                 Compared to training on synthetic data, direct training on real data can significantly enhance the generalizability
                 of NNs, thereby yielding superior low‐frequency extrapolation on field data. However, real data typically lacks
                 low‐frequency information, which raises the question: how can we conduct effective training under these con-
                 straints? Inspired by a denoising method from the machine learning community, known as Noisier2Noise (Moran
                 et al., 2020), we can devise a strategy, called LessLow2Low (L2L), that facilitates training directly on real data.
                 Within the Noisier2Noise framework, we are equipped solely with the original noisy data, which serve as a
                 pseudo‐label. The input data are generated by introducing additional noise to the already noisy original data. By
                 constructing a noisier‐noisy data set in this manner, we can provide a substrate for training the NN. Analogously,
                 we, in our L2L framework, assume that we only have a waveform data set that lacks low‐frequency components in
                 which such data can be treated as pseudo‐label data. Subsequently, a high‐pass filter is applied to this pseudo‐label
                 data to obtain the input for the NN. In this context, the high‐pass filtered data, relative to the original waveform
                 data, possess less low‐frequency components, thereby enabling the establishment of an SSL regime on real data.
                 Nevertheless, considering the higher nonlinearity in the relation between low‐ and high‐frequency data, this
                 paradigm often provides limited capabilities for low‐frequency extrapolation. In the following, we will present an
                 example to illustrate this point.

                 We simulate synthetic data for the Marmousi2 model with a dominant frequency of 15 Hz, followed by the
                 preparation of three distinct training data sets. These data sets share the same input data, derived by subjecting the
                 simulated synthetic data to a high‐pass filter with a cutoff of 10 Hz. However, the label data for each set are
                 unique. For the first data set, the label data come from the original synthetic data set, designated as low full. The
                 second data set's label data are obtained by applying a high‐pass filter with a cutoff frequency at 5 Hz to the
                 original synthetic data identified as lesslow‐low 1. The third data set's label data are filtered to remove frequencies
                 below 7 Hz from the original synthetic data, termed as lesslow‐low 2. The first data set serves as the foundation
                 for the supervised learning of the NN. The rationale behind constructing the latter two data sets is to consider the
                 reality that real data often lacking low‐frequency components. We train NNs using these three data sets, all under
                 the same training configuration as elucidated in subsequent sections.
                 We employ a test data set, from which frequencies below 10 Hz have been filtered out, to assess the low‐
                 frequency extrapolation capabilities of networks trained on three distinct training sets. We extract a single
                 trace from their prediction results for the test data and plot the corresponding amplitude spectra (see Figure 1a),
                 comparing them with the test data and their associated labels. We observe that the network trained on the low‐full
                 data set achieves superior low‐frequency extrapolation, which is definitively attributed to the network being
                 trained in a supervised learning fashion. In contrast, the NNs trained on the two lesslow‐low data sets exhibit
                 somewhat diminished performance. This substantiates the preceding contention that a training paradigm which
                 uses data lacking low‐frequency components as labels can only furnish a limited capacity for low‐frequency
                 extrapolation. For example, the label data in the lesslow‐low 1 data set are devoid of frequency components
                 below 5 Hz. Therefore, they do not include information in their prediction distribution for frequencies below 5 Hz
                 contained the test data. An additional finding is that the network, trained on lesslow‐low 1, exhibits better low‐
                 frequency extrapolation performance than the network trained on lesslow‐low 2. This can be attributed to the fact
                 that the lesslow‐low 1 data set has a lower frequency information bias relative to the lesslow‐low 2 data set when
                 compared with the low‐full data set.

                 An additional test involving using the network trained on the lesslow‐low 2 data set to predict the corresponding
                 pseudo‐label data, which lack below 7 Hz frequencies. The single‐trace amplitude spectrum from the prediction is


CHENG ET AL.                                                                                                                    6 of 32
                                                                                                                                                                           29935210, 2024, 3, Downloaded from https://agupubs.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1029/2024JH000157, Wiley Online Library on [11/01/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
                                    JGR: Machine Learning and Computation                                                             10.1029/2024JH000157




Figure 1. (a) Comparison of amplitude spectrum curves from the prediction results of networks trained on different data sets. (b) The prediction results of the network
trained on the lesslow‐low 2 data set for the original input data, which lack frequency components below 7 Hz, are compared with the amplitude spectrum curves of the
input data and their corresponding labels.

                                          compared with the pseudo‐label data as well as with the original synthetic data, which are depicted in Figure 1b.
                                          We can see that the network trained on lesslow‐low data is capable of extending the frequency to a certain extent
                                          from the original pseudo‐label data.
                                          The two illustrative examples impart two key insights: first, if we can mitigate the frequency information bias
                                          between the lesslow‐low and low‐full data sets, we can incrementally approach the frequency extrapolation
                                          performance of a network trained on the low‐full data set. Second, the networks trained on lesslow‐low data sets
                                          exhibit a certain capacity to extrapolate lower frequencies in the pseudo‐label data involved in their training. From
                                          these insights, we can infer that if we iteratively refine the low‐frequency component information of the pseudo‐
                                          label data using the network trained on the lesslow‐low data, we could ultimately approximate the frequency
                                          extrapolation performance of an SSL framework on real data. Motivated by this inference, in the following
                                          section, we will present our SSL framework for low‐frequency extrapolation.


                                          2.4. Self‐Supervised Low‐Frequency Extrapolation
                                          Drawing on the key findings from the previous section, we develop an SSL framework for low‐frequency
                                          extrapolation. Our framework principally consists of two components: a warm‐up and an IDR phases. The
                                          detailed algorithmic procedure is delineated in Algorithm 1. In the following, we will elucidate the key com-
                                          ponents therein.
                                          First, the NN undergoes a warm‐up phase. We begin by simply employing an L2L procedure to apply a high‐pass
                                          filter to the original seismic data {xi }Ni=1 , which lacks low‐frequency components, thereby creating a lesslow‐low
                                          data set {H[xi ],xi }Ni=1 . Subsequently, the NN is subjected to multiple epochs of optimization training on this data
                                          set. The objective of this process is to enable rapid stabilization of the neural network, allowing it to preliminarily
                                          capture the characteristics of seismic data. Furthermore, the second finding from the previous section indicates
                                          that this pretrained network, denoted as NNw, exhibits a certain degree of low‐frequency extrapolation ability with
                                          respect to the original label data. This capability forms the groundwork for the iterative refinement of the training
                                          set in subsequent stages.
                                          Subsequently, the NN enters the IDR phase. In this stage, we first leverage the pretrained network NNw to predict
                                          the original seismic data. The predictions serve as the initial pseudo‐labels for the IDR phase, with corresponding
                                          inputs derived from applying a high‐pass filter to these predictions. This procedure facilitates the creation of a
                                          new lesslow‐low data set, employed for the first epoch of training during the IDR stage:

                                                                                    NN0 ← {(H[NNw (xi )], NNw (xi ))}Ni=1 ,                                          (7)

                                          where the network NN0 is directly initialized from the per‐trained network NNw.


CHENG ET AL.                                                                                                                                                    7 of 32
                                                                                                                                          29935210, 2024, 3, Downloaded from https://agupubs.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1029/2024JH000157, Wiley Online Library on [11/01/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
               JGR: Machine Learning and Computation                                                   10.1029/2024JH000157


                 Informed by the first insight from the previous section, we anticipate that after training for one epoch on the new
                 training set, the low‐frequency extrapolation capability of NN0 will slightly surpass that of NNw. This
                 improvement is attributed to the fact that, compared to the lesslow‐low data set used during the warm‐up phase,
                 the new lesslow‐low data set exhibits lower frequency representation bias in the labels when both compared with
                 the low‐full data set. During the subsequent training, we iteratively perform this process to progressively diminish
                 the frequency information bias between the lesslow‐low and low‐full data sets. Specifically, for each training
                 epoch, we first employ the network trained in the previous epoch (e.g., NNj− 1) to predict the original data {xi }Ni=1
                 and, thus, obtain the frequency‐extended pseudo‐labels {NNj− 1 (xi )}Ni=1 . Then, we apply a high‐pass filter to these
                 pseudo‐labels to generate corresponding input data {H[NNj− 1 (xi )]}Ni=1 . The resulting lesslow‐low training set
                 {(H[NNj− 1 (xi )], NNj− 1 (xi ))}Ni=1 will optimize the network NNj for one epoch, for example,

                                                       NNj ← {(H[NNj− 1 (xi )], NNj− 1 (xi ))}Ni=1 .                               (8)

                 After conducting multiple epochs of training in the IDR phase, our network incrementally aligns with the low‐
                 frequency extrapolation capabilities of a model trained on the low‐full data set.

                 We emphasize that during the warm‐up and IDR stages, the cutoff frequency employed in the high‐pass filtering
                 operation to remove low‐frequency components is not fixed. In Section 4.4, we will share our experiences to
                 setting the filter cutoff frequency during training process, which contributes to enhance the network's low‐
                 frequency extrapolation performance.

                 Algorithm 1. Self-Supervised Low-Frequency Extrapolation

                 Input: Raw band-limited seismic data {xi }Ni=1 .
                 Input: Neural network model NN.
                 Input: High-pass filter H [⋅].
                 Input: Ewarmup: The number of epochs during the warm-up phase.
                 Input: Eidr: The number of epochs during the iterative data refinement phase.
                 ——————————— Warm-up phase ——————————
                 Output: Pretrained model NNw
                   1: Randomly initialize network parameters θ
                   2: for j in Ewarmup do
                   3:    Perform the high-pass filter on raw seismic data H[xi]
                   4:    Construct the lesslow-low data set {H[xi ],xi }Ni=1
                   5:    Optimize the network NNw on the lesslow-low data set
                               NNw ← {H[xi ],xi }Ni=1
                   6: end for
                 ———————–Iterative data refinement phase ———————
                 Output: Final low-frequency extrapolation model NNEidr
                   7: Predict the raw band-limited seismic data {NNw (xi )}Ni=1
                   8: Construct the new refined lesslow-low data set
                               {H[NNw (xi )],NNw (xi )}Ni=1
                   9: Initialize the network NN0 = NNw
                   10: Optimize the network NN0 on the new lesslow-low data set for one epoch
                               NN0 ← {H[NNw (xi )],NNw (xi )}Ni=1
                   11: for j → 1 in Eidr do
                   12:    Generate the low-frequency extended data {NNj− 1 (xi )}Ni=1
                   13:    Construct the new refined lesslow-low data set
                               {H[NNj− 1 (xi )],NNj− 1 (xi )}Ni=1
                   14:    Initialize the network NNj = NNj− 1
                   15:    Optimize the network NNj on the new lesslow-low data set for one epoch
                               NNj ← {H[NNj− 1 (xi )],NNj− 1 (xi )}Ni=1
                   16: end for



CHENG ET AL.                                                                                                                   8 of 32
                                                                                                                                                               29935210, 2024, 3, Downloaded from https://agupubs.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1029/2024JH000157, Wiley Online Library on [11/01/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
                                   JGR: Machine Learning and Computation                                                     10.1029/2024JH000157




Figure 2. The neural network architecture used in our study.




                                         2.5. Network Architecture and Training Procedure
                                         Our SSL framework employs a classic network architecture, namely U‐Net (Ronneberger et al., 2015), which
                                         has been widely utilized in the NN‐based seismic processing workflows (Cheng et al., 2024; X. Wu et al., 2019;
                                         F. Yang & Ma, 2019). Figure 2 comprehensively details the network architecture utilized in this study. It is
                                         noteworthy that we did not strictly follow the classic U‐Net structure but instead made several modifications to
                                         suit our specific requirements. The first significant change is in scaling: rather than adopting the four scales
                                         typical of the traditional U‐Net, we incorporate five scales, involving five 2 × 2 downsampling and 2 × 2
                                         upsampling operations. The rationale behind this modification is that different scales often represent different
                                         frequency component information. By extracting features across multiple scales, we aim to train an NN that is
                                         more attuned to various frequency components, which in turn is expected to enhance the network's capability in
                                         low‐frequency extrapolation. The second modification involves the skip connections at the network's maximum
                                         scale: they directly receive the input data rather than data that have undergone transformations through an input
                                         layer. This strategy is adopted to circumvent the loss of original signal information that can be caused by the
                                         network's depth. Since CNNs could potentially create a smoothing effect, which might entail the loss of high‐
                                         frequency signals, we deliberately avoid impairing these high‐frequency signals during the process of low‐
                                         frequency extrapolation. The third modification exists in the convolution layers, whereas the classic U‐Net
                                         baseline employs a 3 × 3 convolution layer followed by batch normalization (BN) and a leaky rectified
                                         linear unit (LeakyReLU) activation function, our experiments revealed that incorporating BN would produce
                                         unstable low‐frequency signals during the IDR phase. Therefore, we omit BN to ensure that the network
                                         provides a reliable solution.
                                         During the training process, we present a hybrid loss function to co‐optimize the network. This hybrid loss
                                         function consists of a data loss Ld and an amplitude spectrum loss La . The data loss measures the difference
                                         between the NN's outputs Oi i = 1, …, N and the corresponding pseudo‐labels Li, i = 1, …, N, using the mean
                                         absolute error (MAE) as follows:


                                                                                                  1 N
                                                                                     Ld (L,O) =     ∑|L − Oi |.                                         (9)
                                                                                                  N i=1 i


                                         Compared to the mean squared error (MSE) loss function, the MAE loss function exhibits increased robustness
                                         toward outliers. As we know, seismic data usually contain significant outliers due to various types of noise. These
                                         outliers disproportionately influence MSE, potentially leading to suboptimal low‐frequency extrapolation.




CHENG ET AL.                                                                                                                                        9 of 32
                                                                                                                                            29935210, 2024, 3, Downloaded from https://agupubs.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1029/2024JH000157, Wiley Online Library on [11/01/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
               JGR: Machine Learning and Computation                                                     10.1029/2024JH000157




                 Figure 3. The true Marmousi velocity model.



                 Therefore, we chose the MAE loss function to make our method more suitable for low‐frequency extrapolation of
                 noisy data. The amplitude spectrum loss La is obtained by computing the misfit in amplitude spectra between the
                 network's output and the pseudo‐labels, also employing the MAE metric as follows:


                                                                      1 N
                                                         La (L,O) =     ∑|AS(Li ) − AS(Oi )|,                                       (10)
                                                                      N i=1


                 where the symbol AS(·) represents the operation for obtaining the amplitude spectrum.
                 The total loss function is defined as


                                                          L(L,O) = Ld (L,O) + ϵ ⋅ La (L,O),                                         (11)


                 where ϵ is a hyperparameter, which is used to regulate the proportion of the amplitude spectrum loss within the
                 total loss. In our numerical examples, we set it to a constant value of 0.01. The role of loss La and the setting of the
                 hyperparameter ϵ will be thoroughly analyzed in the discussion section. We utilize the AdamW optimization
                 algorithm (Loshchilov & Hutter, 2017) in our training stage. The implementation employs a GeForce RTX 8000
                 graphics processing unit and leverages the PyTorch framework.
                 Since our approach utilizes an SSL to train the network, it differs significantly from the supervised learning
                 paradigm in how we stop the training and the purpose for testing data. In typical supervised learning frameworks,
                 early stopping techniques, primarily relying on the convergence of the validation set, are often used to determine
                 when to stop training the NN. However, for our SSL framework, the training data is also the validation/test data.
                 Instead, a common practice is to set a predefined number of iterations and output intermediate processing results
                 for the training data at regular intervals. Then, we can assess whether the network has converged to the desired
                 performance based on these intermediate processing results. Therefore, the iteration count that achieves the
                 optimal low‐frequency extrapolation performance may not necessarily be the maximum iteration count, and it
                 depends on our assessment of the processing results.


                 3. Numerical Examples
                 3.1. Synthetic Data
                 In order to verify the reasonability and accuracy of the proposed algorithm, we first use the simulated data
                 generated with the Marmousi model to perform the following tests. The modified model size is 2.20 × 6.11 km
                 with a spatial interval of 10.0 m along both horizontal and vertical directions. Figure 3 displays the true Marmousi


CHENG ET AL.                                                                                                                   10 of 32
                                                                                                                                           29935210, 2024, 3, Downloaded from https://agupubs.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1029/2024JH000157, Wiley Online Library on [11/01/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
               JGR: Machine Learning and Computation                                                    10.1029/2024JH000157


                 velocity model with the modified dimensions. A Ricker wavelet with dominant frequency of 15 Hz is used as the
                 source signal to generate the mimic observed seismic data. We generate a total of 122 shot gathers, each recording
                 2,401 time steps with a time interval of 0.002 s. The distance between shots is 50 m, with the initial shot located at
                 the model's far left at zero km. From these 122 shot gathers, we extract a total of 8,200 data patches, each sized
                 128 × 128. For each patch, we randomly choose the cutoff low‐frequencies between 5 and 15 Hz, forming our
                 original observed data set. During the warm‐up phase, we randomly filter out frequency components below
                 6∼30 Hz from the original observed data to generate the input data. As previously described, the pseudo‐label
                 data at this time is the original observed data. In the IDR phase, the high‐pass filter cutoff frequency range for
                 the initial 50 epochs is set between 5 and 7 Hz. Then, every 50 epochs, we increase the maximum cutoff frequency
                 by 2 Hz, while the minimum cutoff frequency remains at 5 Hz. Once the maximum cutoff frequency reaches
                 15 Hz, it is kept fixed. The network is trained for a total of 550 epochs, with the warm‐up phase accounting for 50
                 epochs. The learning rate start with 3e− 4 then decreased by a factor of 0.8 at the 65, 130, 195, 260, and 325
                 epochs.
                 Figure 4a shows the seismogram of a simulated shot gather. We use a high‐pass filter to cut off different frequency
                 components, as shown in Figures 4b, 4e, and 4h filtered with 5, 10, and 15 Hz high‐pass filters, respectively.
                 Figures 4c, 4f, and 4i show the prediction results for these three filtered data respectively, and the residuals
                 between these prediction results and the mimic observed seismogram are displayed in Figures 4d, 4g, and 4j,
                 respectively. We can see that for the data lacking frequencies below 5 Hz, our method's prediction exhibits only
                 very subtle differences compared to the original data. As the data lacks more low frequencies, the errors in our
                 method's predictions gradually increase, which is expected since it's not straightforward.
                 To clearly verify the performance of the proposed algorithm in reconstructing the low‐frequency components, we
                 perform a spectral analysis of the traces at different locations between the original, filtered, and predicted data, as
                 displayed in Figures 5–7. The predicted amplitude spectrum of data with cutoff frequency of 15 Hz (Figure 5) and
                 10 Hz (Figure 6) exhibit a good recovery of the filtered out components after applying the proposed algorithm.
                 The reconstructed low‐frequency components (green line) commendably match the original true information
                 (orange line) at the missing band range. As for the more practical case with cutoff frequency of 5 Hz (Figure 7),
                 the proposed extrapolation algorithm can still recover the missing low‐frequency information even to 1.5 Hz.
                 Therefore, Figures 5–7 prove the accuracy, stability, and reasonability of the proposed SSL low‐frequency
                 extrapolation algorithm.
                 Meanwhile, to clearly display the waveform differences between the original, filtered, and predicted data,
                 Figure 8 compares two seismograms extracted from them, where the receivers are located at the horizontal
                 distance x = 0.3 km and x = 3.5 km, respectively. We can see that as more frequency components are filtered out,
                 the waveform differences between the filtered and original data gradually increase, especially for the filtered data
                 missing frequencies below 15 Hz. In contrast, the waveform of the extrapolated data can match the original data
                 well. Even for the filtered data missing frequencies below 15 Hz, our method can still reconstruct waveforms that
                 closely match the original data.
                 With the predicted data after low‐frequency extrapolation, we perform the following FWI tests. Figure 9 shows
                 the inversion results with cutoff frequency of 10 Hz. Figure 9a displays the smoothed initial velocity model, which
                 is far away from the true model in Figure 3. We choose five frequency bands with dominant frequencies of 3, 4, 5,
                 8, and 15 Hz to perform the multiscale inversion. Figure 9b is the corresponding result of the original full‐band
                 data, matching the true model perfectly. If we directly use the data with cutoff frequency of 10.0 Hz to conduct the
                 test, the inversion result is contaminated with artifacts because of the missing low‐frequency information (see
                 Figure 9c). In comparison, we can reconstruct the subsurface velocity model well with the predicted seismic data
                 (see Figure 9d). To precisely show the inversion results, we choose the profiles at x = 2.5, 3.5, and 4.5 km and
                 exhibit them in Figure 10. We can see that the direct inversion of filtered data (red line) is far away from the true
                 model (blue line). Encouragingly, the inversion result of the predicted data (purple line) is similar to that of the
                 full‐band original data (green line), both of which match the true model perfectly.
                 In line with real seismic exploration scenarios, we also perform the tests on the data missing frequency infor-
                 mation below 5 Hz. In order to highlight the importance of the low frequency components, we use a smoother
                 velocity as the initial model (Figure 11a). Five frequency bands with dominant frequencies of 2, 3, 5, 8, and 15 Hz
                 are selected to conduct the multiscale inversion. Figure 11b displays the result of the inversion applied to the
                 original full‐band data, which also nicely match the true model. When using the filtered data missing frequency


CHENG ET AL.                                                                                                                  11 of 32
                                                                                                                                                   29935210, 2024, 3, Downloaded from https://agupubs.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1029/2024JH000157, Wiley Online Library on [11/01/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
               JGR: Machine Learning and Computation                                                           10.1029/2024JH000157




                 Figure 4. The extrapolation results for the test shot gathers missing different low‐frequency components. (a) The original full
                 band data; data filtered by different high‐pass filters: (b) 5 Hz, (e) 10 Hz, and (h) 15 Hz; the corresponding data recovered
                 with the proposed self‐supervised learning algorithm: (c) 5 Hz, (f) 10 Hz, and (i) 15 Hz; the residuals between the prediction
                 results and the mimic observed seismogram: (d) 5 Hz, (g) 10 Hz, and (j) 15 Hz.



CHENG ET AL.                                                                                                                           12 of 32
                                                                                                                                                                            29935210, 2024, 3, Downloaded from https://agupubs.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1029/2024JH000157, Wiley Online Library on [11/01/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
                                    JGR: Machine Learning and Computation                                                               10.1029/2024JH000157




Figure 5. The amplitude spectrum comparison at different locations: (a) x = 0.3 km, (b) x = 1 km, (c) x = 2 km, (d) x = 3 km, (e) x = 3.5 km, and (f) x = 4 km. The 15 Hz
high‐pass filter is used.

                                           information below 5 Hz to conduct the test, the inversion result is poor due to the cycle‐skipping issue. With the
                                           proposed algorithm to extrapolate the filtered data, the inversion result can recover the velocity well. Figure 12
                                           displays the profiles at x = 2.5, 3.5, and 4.5 km, from which we can see that the result of the filtered data has both
                                           numerical and depth errors compared to the true model. In contrast, the result of using the predicted data fits the
                                           true model very well, which is similar to the inversion applied to the original data.


                                           3.2. Field Data
                                           After verifying the accuracy and reasonability of the proposed algorithm, we attempt to apply it to real marine
                                           seismic data. The data were acquired in North West Australia using a variable depth streamer. The original data
                                           set comprises 1,824 shots spaced approximately 18.75 m apart laterally. For our test, we select 201 shots, with
                                           56 m lateral spacing, to lower the computational burden. Each shot gather is acquired through steamer cables with
                                           a maximum offset of 8.0 km and a 12.5 m recording spacing.
                                           The original acquired data included frequency components as low as 2.5 Hz. In our experiment, to consider a more
                                           general scenario where typically collected data lack frequencies below 5 Hz, we filtered out frequencies below
                                           5 Hz from the original acquired data, treating it as our available observed data. We extract 18,500 data patches
                                           from the filtered shot gathers, each sized 128 × 128. During the warm‐up phase, the network undergoes pre-
                                           training for 50 epochs, where the input data is prepared by performing a high‐pass filter with a cutoff frequency of
                                           10 Hz on the observed data. In the IDR phase, the initial range for the high‐pass filter cutoff frequency is set
                                           between 1 and 2 Hz and then increases by 0.5 Hz for both the upper and lower limits every 20 epochs. Eventually,
                                           the filter cutoff frequency is fixed between 4 and 5 Hz. Instead of starting from scratch, here the network is
                                           initialized from the model trained on the synthetic data. The network is trained with a total of 200 epochs. The
                                           initial learning rate is 2e− 4, which is reduced by a factor of 0.8 at the 25, 50, 75, 100, 125, and 150 epochs.




CHENG ET AL.                                                                                                                                                    13 of 32
                                                                                                                                                                  29935210, 2024, 3, Downloaded from https://agupubs.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1029/2024JH000157, Wiley Online Library on [11/01/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
                                    JGR: Machine Learning and Computation                                                      10.1029/2024JH000157




Figure 6. Similar with Figure 5, but the 10 Hz high‐pass filter is used.

                                          Figure 13a denotes the original seismogram of the first shot. Figure 13b shows the corresponding filtered shot
                                          gather, where we cut off the information below 5 Hz. Figure 13c is the result after low‐frequency extrapolation
                                          with the proposed algorithm. Figures 13d–13f displays the energy below 5 Hz of the original, filtered, and
                                          predicted data from which we find that the original signal below 5 Hz has weaker energy than the predicted one.
                                          This is because the prediction does not have limitations in the low frequency limit, whereas the data contain
                                          limited energy below 2.5 Hz. As shown in Figures 13g–13i, we manage to predict low frequency information
                                          below 2.5 Hz. Figure 13j shows that there still exists some signal of reflected waves, which means that the
                                          proposed algorithm could extrapolate to frequencies as low as 1.75 Hz.

                                          Figure 14a displays the initial velocity model, and Figures 14b and 14d are the inversion results of the original and
                                          predicted data with starting dominant frequency of 2.5 Hz. The corresponding inversion results are similar to a
                                          large degree, indirectly proving that the frequency components within 2.5∼5.0 Hz predicted by our algorithm are
                                          consistent with the original data. However, the result of the predicted data shows some additional details, which
                                          correspond to the additional components less than 2.5 Hz after the frequency extrapolation. If we directly use the
                                          filtered data to perform the inversion, the corresponding inversion result is shown in Figure 14c. We can see that
                                          two big false faults appear at x = 3 and 8 km caused by the cycle‐skipping problem. To emphasize the positive
                                          performance of our proposed low‐frequency extrapolation algorithm, we conduct a comparative inversion test
                                          with an initial dominant frequency of 1.75 Hz. The corresponding outcome is presented in Figure 14e. Contrasting
                                          the outcomes displayed in Figures 14b and 14d, the result depicted in Figure 14e reveals a more comprehensive
                                          representation of the background information.

                                          To demonstrate the accuracy of the different velocity models shown in Figure 14, we perform RTM. Figure 15
                                          shows the corresponding migration images. Compared to the image from the initial model (Figure 15a), those of
                                          the FWI results (Figures 15b–15e), to some degree, show the stratigraphic relief. To evaluate the accuracy of the
                                          images, we choose three common image gathers at x = 2.15, 5.5, and 6.9 km to make a detailed analysis, as shown
                                          in Figure 16. Compared to the other images, that of the predicted data with a starting dominant frequency of




CHENG ET AL.                                                                                                                                          14 of 32
                                                                                                                                                                    29935210, 2024, 3, Downloaded from https://agupubs.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1029/2024JH000157, Wiley Online Library on [11/01/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
                                    JGR: Machine Learning and Computation                                                        10.1029/2024JH000157




Figure 7. Similar with Figure 5, but the 5 Hz high‐pass filter is used.

                                          1.75 Hz resulted in less noise (depicted by the dashed square area) and more flat gathers (indicated by the red
                                          arrows), proving the accuracy of the proposed algorithm.


                                          3.3. Application on Earthquake Seismogram Data
                                          We finally select an earthquake seismogram data to demonstrate the generalizability and feasibility of our method
                                          for extending the frequency band to ultralow frequency components for large‐scale collected data. This earth-
                                          quake seismogram data were collected in western Sichuan, China. The distribution of dense seismic stations and
                                          the structure of the collection area are shown in Figure 17. The waveforms used were recorded from September
                                          2006 to July 2009.
                                          In our experiment of low‐frequency extrapolation of earthquake seismogram, we implement several modifica-
                                          tions compared to processing in exploration data: (a) Instead of extracting two‐dimensional data patches to
                                          construct data sets, we extract one‐dimensional data, each comprising 128 time steps, directly from the acquired
                                          data; (b) Given that our training data are one‐dimensional, we adapt our network architecture to include one‐
                                          dimensional convolutional baselines; (c) In the initial training epochs, due to the network's instability, the pre-
                                          dicted low‐frequency components include some ultralow‐frequency numerical artifacts. Consequently, in the IDR
                                          phase, frequencies below 0.1 Hz are filtered out from the network's predicted pseudo‐labels to ensure the stability
                                          of the network training process. We select two teleseismic events, specifically events 51 and 53, from the
                                          collected earthquake seismogram. The original collected data contain frequencies below 0.25 Hz. To consider the
                                          scenario of missing low‐frequencies, we applied a high‐pass filter with a cutoff frequency of 0.25 Hz to the
                                          original data. The filtered data, assumed as known, are used to construct our training data set. Notably, the original
                                          collected data are not included in our training set, as our approach operates on an SSL basis. During the training's
                                          warm‐up and IDR phases, we employ a similar strategy progressively increasing the high‐pass filter cutoff
                                          frequency range, ultimately fixing it at 0.25 Hz. The network undergoes training for a total of 300 epochs. The
                                          initial learning rate 1e− 4, and a scheduler reduces it by a factor of 0.8 at the 30, 60, 90, 120, 150, and 180 epochs.



CHENG ET AL.                                                                                                                                           15 of 32
                                                                                                                                                                      29935210, 2024, 3, Downloaded from https://agupubs.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1029/2024JH000157, Wiley Online Library on [11/01/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
                                   JGR: Machine Learning and Computation                                                           10.1029/2024JH000157




Figure 8. Comparison of seismograms between the predicted, the input, and original recordings at different horizontal distances, where the first and second columns
correspond to x = 0.3 km and x = 3.5 km, respectively. Each column corresponds to the result comparisons of data missing below 5, 10, and 15 Hz from top to bottom.

                                         We present the original seismic waveforms of different teleseismic events (Figure 18 for event 20 and Figure 19
                                         for event 73), along with the waveforms filtered to exclude frequency components below 0.25 Hz and compared
                                         these with the predicted waveforms under various low‐pass filters. Due to the complexity of the coda wave
                                         following the direct P phase, we establish a variable time window to better demonstrate the restoration of low‐
                                         frequency components in the predicted waveforms relative to the original recordings. This time window is
                                         indicated by the light green shaded areas in Figures 18 and 19 (panel (a)). Within this window, we extract the
                                         band‐passed original recordings (black), filtered waveforms (blue), and predicted waveforms (red). We then
                                         compute their normalized cross‐correlation coefficients (NCC) across different filtering bands (0.01–0.15 Hz,
                                         0.01–0.2 Hz, 0.01–0.25 Hz, 0.01–0.3 Hz). The NCC values thus reflect the degree of fit from the onset of the P‐
                                         wave to the later coda waves. As observed in panels (b) of Figures 18 and 19, for different low‐pass filters, the
                                         predicted waveforms exhibit a better restoration of the original low‐frequency components (the red NCC curves
                                         are consistently above the blue ones). These results demonstrate the effectiveness of our method in the restoration
                                         of ultralow‐frequency content in the earthquake waveform data.

                                         4. Discussion
                                         In this paper, we have concurrently validated the efficacy of our developed low‐frequency extrapolation method
                                         on both exploration seismic and earthquake seismogram data. Owing to our method's adoption of a SSL paradigm,


CHENG ET AL.                                                                                                                                               16 of 32
                                                                                                                                                                               29935210, 2024, 3, Downloaded from https://agupubs.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1029/2024JH000157, Wiley Online Library on [11/01/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
                                     JGR: Machine Learning and Computation                                                                10.1029/2024JH000157




Figure 9. (a) The initial velocity model and inversion results generated with different data sets: (b) original full band data, (c) filtered data with a cutoff frequency of
10 Hz, and (d) the predicted data with the proposed algorithm.


                                           it effectively obviates the need for labels, thereby enhancing its practical application potential. Subsequently, we
                                           will first explain why our framework works. Then, we will discuss the robustness of our method against noisy
                                           data, the role of the amplitude spectrum loss, and the strategies for the effective setting of filtering frequencies.


                                           4.1. Why Our Framework Works?
                                           As stated in the Introduction and Section 2.2, the feasibility of neural networks (NNs)‐based seismic low‐
                                           frequency extrapolation has been demonstrated. Many studies have shown the use of NNs to learn the




Figure 10. Profiles at different horizontal distances: (a) x = 2.5 km, (b) x = 3.5 km, and (c) x = 4.5 km. The cutoff frequency is 10 Hz.


CHENG ET AL.                                                                                                                                                       17 of 32
                                                                                                                                                                                29935210, 2024, 3, Downloaded from https://agupubs.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1029/2024JH000157, Wiley Online Library on [11/01/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
                                     JGR: Machine Learning and Computation                                                                 10.1029/2024JH000157




Figure 11. (a) The initial velocity model and inversion results generated with different data sets: (b) original full band data, (c) filtered data with a cutoff frequency of
5 Hz, and (d) the predicted data with the proposed algorithm.


                                            nonlinear relationship between high‐ and low‐frequency, which is then applied to extrapolate low‐frequency
                                            contents (Fang et al., 2020; Hu et al., 2021; Y. Jin et al., 2021; Ovcharenko et al., 2019; H. Sun & Demanet, 2020).
                                            In particular, Ovcharenko et al. (2019) theoretically demonstrated why low‐frequency information can be
                                            extrapolated from high frequencies. Specifically, they use the acoustic medium as an example. In the frequency
                                            domain, the pressure wavefield generated by a point source at location xs satisfies the Helmholtz equation:

                                                                                            ω2
                                                                                      (Δx + 2 ) p(x,ω) = δ(x − xs ) s(ω),                                                (12)
                                                                                           v (x)




Figure 12. Profiles at different horizontal distances: (a) x = 2.5 km, (b) x = 3.5 km, and (c) x = 4.5 km. The cutoff frequency is 5 Hz.


CHENG ET AL.                                                                                                                                                        18 of 32
                                                                                                                                                    29935210, 2024, 3, Downloaded from https://agupubs.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1029/2024JH000157, Wiley Online Library on [11/01/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
               JGR: Machine Learning and Computation                                                            10.1029/2024JH000157




                 Figure 13. Real marine seismic data, which were acquired from North West Australia. (a) The original observed data, (b) the
                 data filtered by 5 Hz high‐pass filters, and (c) the predicted data with the proposed algorithm. The frequency components less
                 than 5 Hz: (d) original data, (e) filtered data, and (f) predicted data. The frequency components less than 2.5 Hz: (g) original
                 data, (h) filtered data, and (i) predicted data. The frequency components less than 1.75 Hz: (j) predicted data.



CHENG ET AL.                                                                                                                            19 of 32
                                                                                                                                                                              29935210, 2024, 3, Downloaded from https://agupubs.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1029/2024JH000157, Wiley Online Library on [11/01/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
                                     JGR: Machine Learning and Computation                                                                10.1029/2024JH000157




Figure 14. (a) The initial velocity model. Inversion results of different data sets: (b) the original observed data, (c) the data with cutoff frequency of 5 Hz, (d) the
predicted data (with starting frequency of 2.5 Hz), and (e) the predicted data (with starting frequency of 1.75 Hz).



                                                               2
                                                         ∂
                                           where Δx = ∑i ∂x2 , ω is the angular frequency and v(x) represents the velocity model. They considered the Born
                                                               i

                                           approximation for perturbed wavefields in a homogeneous medium and represented the relationship between data
                                           and model spectra as follows:

                                                                                                δp(s,g,ω) ∝ δv(K),                                                     (13)

                                           where the wavenumber K = ω/v(s + g), and s and g are the unit vectors pointing toward the source and the
                                           receiver, respectively. Since most subsurface models are commonly dominated by horizontal structures, the
                                           vertical wavenumber in the model spectra controls the variation of horizontal structures along the vertical di-
                                           rection. Therefore, the relationship between the perturbed wavefield and the wavenumber can be further
                                           simplified as follows:

                                                                                                 δp(θ,ω) ∝ δv( K z ),                                                  (14)

                                           with the vertical wavenumber




CHENG ET AL.                                                                                                                                                      20 of 32
                                                                                                                                                                                    29935210, 2024, 3, Downloaded from https://agupubs.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1029/2024JH000157, Wiley Online Library on [11/01/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
                                      JGR: Machine Learning and Computation                                                                   10.1029/2024JH000157




Figure 15. Reverse time migration images generated with different velocity models: (a) the initial velocity model, (b) the inversion result of original observed data,
(c) the inversion result of data with cutoff frequency of 5 Hz, (d) the inversion result of the predicted data (with starting frequency of 2.5 Hz), and (e) the inversion result
of the predicted data (with starting frequency of 1.75 Hz).


                                                                                                                  ω    θ
                                                                                                  K z (θ,ω) = 2     cos ,                                                    (15)
                                                                                                                  v    2

                                             where θ represents the opening angle between s and g, which encodes the offset.
                                             We can see that, from Equation 14, if we have a perturbed wavefield δp(θ1, ω1), we can construct a velocity model
                                             at wavenumber Kz(θ1, ω1) from this perturbed wavefield. Subsequently, we can further model any wavefield, for
                                             example, δp(θ2, ω2), using this constructed velocity model as follows:

                                                                                           δp(θ1 ,ω1 ) → δv( K z ) → δp(θ2 ,ω2 ).                                            (16)

                                             Thus, our NN here aims to directly learn this nonlinear relationship, for example, δp(θ2, ω2) = NN(δp(θ1, ω1)), to
                                             extrapolate low‐frequency information from higher frequencies.

                                             However, they ignored an important issue: the learned nonlinear relationship theoretically only applies to specific
                                             velocity models in which the training data are collected (see Equation 16). In other words, the trained network can
                                             only produce low‐frequency information corresponding to specific velocity models. In the existing supervised
                                             learning framework, since the labels of real data are not obtainable, NNs are often trained on the synthetic data.
                                             Consequently, the trained network encounters performance degradation when applied to field data. One signif-
                                             icant reason for this is that the trained network can only be applied to specific velocity models used to create the
                                             synthetic data. When the model spectral characteristics of synthetic and real data significantly differ, the network



CHENG ET AL.                                                                                                                                                            21 of 32
                                                                                                                                                                                  29935210, 2024, 3, Downloaded from https://agupubs.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1029/2024JH000157, Wiley Online Library on [11/01/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
                                      JGR: Machine Learning and Computation                                                                  10.1029/2024JH000157




Figure 16. Common image gathers at the horizontal locations x = 2.15, 5.5, and 6.9 km using: (a) the initial velocity model, (b) the inversion result of original observed
data, (c) the inversion result of data with cutoff frequency of 5 Hz, (d) the inversion result of the predicted data (with starting frequency of 2.5 Hz), and (e) the inversion
result of the predicted data (with starting frequency of 1.75 Hz).

                                            fails to effectively extrapolate low frequencies in field data. In contrast, our algorithm employs SSL, meaning that
                                            we directly train on the data that need to be processed. That is for field data collected in a survey area, we directly
                                            utilize it to train the NN. Upon completing training, we directly process the observed data to obtain extrapolation
                                            results, thereby effectively addressing this issue.
                                            From the results of numerical examples, our method demonstrates the ability to extrapolate low frequencies for
                                            both synthetic and field data. Although we cannot guarantee the absolute accuracy of these extrapolated fre-
                                            quencies, the test results indicate that they are indeed effective for FWI, helping to mitigate the cycle‐skipping
                                            issue. Consequently, we can use the trained network to extrapolate low frequencies, thereby enhancing the ac-
                                            curacy of the inversion.


                                            4.2. Robustness to Noise

                                            It is widely recognized that observed seismic data are invariably contaminated by noise. Therefore, a critical
                                            examination is the robustness of our method against noise in the data. Recently, an SSL paradigm for noise
                                            reduction have proven its efficacy in attenuating various types of seismic noise (Cheng, Cheng, et al., 2023). By
                                            integrating a noise reduction functionality into our SSL low‐frequency extrapolation approach, we can present a
                                            unified SSL framework. This framework is capable of performing both denoising and low‐frequency extrapo-
                                            lation processing on seismic data simultaneously. In the following, we will meticulously explore how to make
                                            fine‐tuned adjustments to the developed SSL algorithms (Algorithm 1) to fulfill this purpose.
                                            Initially, during the warm‐up phase, we need to alter the generation mode of input data in the lesslow‐low data set.
                                            This entails adding noise to the original noisy data after it has been high‐pass filtered, for example,

                                                                                            Ii = H[xi ] + ni , i = 1, ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ,N,                                            (17)




CHENG ET AL.                                                                                                                                                          22 of 32
                                                                                                                                                                           29935210, 2024, 3, Downloaded from https://agupubs.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1029/2024JH000157, Wiley Online Library on [11/01/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
                                    JGR: Machine Learning and Computation                                                               10.1029/2024JH000157




Figure 17. The local structure and stations distribution in the selected western Sichuan for the study. The blue triangles in the figure represent the two‐dimensional
seismic array used in this research. All stations are arranged along a reflection profile: the Aba‐Zigong measurement line (indicated by the thick yellow line). The
epicenters of the 2008 Wenchuan earthquake (top right) and the 2013 Lushan earthquake (bottom left) are marked with cyan pentagrams.


                                          where the Ii represents the input data, and ni denotes the added noise. The pseudo‐labels, however, remain the
                                          original noisy data xi. It is important to note that the original noisy data also lack low frequency content. In other
                                          words, the training of our coupled framework for low‐frequency extrapolation and denoising is conducted under
                                          an SSL paradigm.

                                          Similarly, during the IDR stage, we create a new lesslow‐low data set's input by adding noise to the network's
                                          predicted results after high‐pass filtering, such as

                                                                                     Ii = H[NN(xi )] + ni , i = 1, ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ,N.                                        (18)

                                          The pseudo‐labels are still the network's predictions of the original noisy data NN(xi). With these modifications,
                                          we can see that the input data, compared to the original noisy data, not only lack more low‐frequency components
                                          but also contain a stronger noise. Consequently, the network is trained to optimize two objectives simultaneously:
                                          denoising and low‐frequency extrapolation.
                                          We share an example to validate the performance of the coupled SSL approach. We continue to employ the
                                          synthetic data generated in Section 3.1. The original noisy data exhibit a deficiency in the low‐frequency range of
                                          5∼10 Hz, and they include random noise with the levels ranging from 5 to 30 generated by the subsequent
                                          equation:

                                                                               ni = 0.01 ⋅ ξ ⋅ std(Li ) ⋅ rand(0,1), i = 1, ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ,N,                               (19)

                                          where the ξ is the noise level, std(Li) represents the standard deviation of the pseudo‐label Li, and rand(0, 1) is the
                                          standard normal distribution.



CHENG ET AL.                                                                                                                                                   23 of 32
                                                                                                                                                                            29935210, 2024, 3, Downloaded from https://agupubs.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1029/2024JH000157, Wiley Online Library on [11/01/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
                                    JGR: Machine Learning and Computation                                                               10.1029/2024JH000157




Figure 18. The original recordings of the Z component received from teleseismic event 20 shown in black lines in panels (a), following a band‐pass filter (0.01–0.25 Hz).
The waveforms after filtering out frequencies below 0.25 Hz and then applying the same band‐pass filter (0.01–0.25 Hz) illustrated in blue lines in panels (a). The
predicted results to the filtered waveforms without low‐frequency components below 0.25 Hz, followed by the same band‐pass filter (0.01–0.25 Hz), represented by red
lines in panels (a). The panel (b) illustrates a comparison of the normalized cross‐correlation coefficients (NCC) for waveforms with and without low‐frequency
components below 0.25 Hz and predicted waveforms under four different band‐pass filtering operations (from top left to bottom right: 0.01–0.15 Hz, 0.01–0.2 Hz, 0.01–
0.25 Hz, 0.01–0.3 Hz). This comparison is conducted for different time windows. These windows are defined from two minimum periods (2/fe, where fe is the highest
cutoff frequency of the respective band‐pass filter) before the maximum P‐wave amplitude of the broadband waveform (indicated by the cyan dashed line) to varying
lengths afterward (ranging from 1 s to a maximum of 2.25/fe s). The NCC coefficients are calculated from the band‐pass filtered results of the original waveforms and
either the predicted waveforms or those without low‐frequency components below 0.25 Hz (represented by red and blue curves, corresponding to the colors in
panels (a)).

                                           In the warm‐up phase, the network is pretrained for 50 epochs. When we create the lesslow‐low data set, the
                                           original noisy data are filtered within the range of 6∼25 Hz. The noise level added to the post‐filtered results,
                                           ranging from 5 to 30, is used to construct the input data. In the IDR phase, the initial 50 epochs involve a random
                                           high‐pass cutoff frequency ranging from 5 to 6 Hz. Subsequently, every 50 epochs, the upper limit of the high‐
                                           pass cutoff frequency is increased by 1 Hz. This cutoff frequency range is fixed when it reaches the range of
                                           5∼10 Hz. Throughout this entire phase, the level of noise added also varies randomly within the range of 5–30.
                                           The network in total undergoes training across 290 epochs. The initial learning rate is 2e− 4, and a scheduler
                                           reduces it by a factor of 0.8 for every 65 epochs.
                                           Figure 20 presents the test results for a noisy shot gather. Panel (a) displays the original simulated data. Panel (b)
                                           shows the data from panel (a) with frequencies below 10 Hz removed and random noise of level 15 added. The
                                           corresponding prediction results are shown in panel (c), with the residuals between the prediction and the original
                                           simulated data displayed in panel (d). Compared to panel (b), panel (e) contains a shot gather with stronger noise,
                                           the corresponding prediction results for which are shown in panel (f), and the discrepancy between the prediction
                                           and the original simulated data is displayed in panel (g). It is evident that our framework is effective in removing
                                           noise. Undoubtedly, our method also attenuates some of the signal energy, particularly the deep signals in sce-
                                           narios with strong noise. This occurs because we lack frequency components below 10 Hz. In such instances, the
                                           added noise significantly overwhelms the weaker deep reflection signals, leading to the attenuation of these
                                           signals' energy while removing noise.

                                           To further validate the frequency extension performance, we plot the amplitude spectrum curve of the prediction
                                           (panel (f)), which is shown is Figure 21, comparing it with the original simulated data and the test data from panel


CHENG ET AL.                                                                                                                                                    24 of 32
                                                                                                                                                                           29935210, 2024, 3, Downloaded from https://agupubs.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1029/2024JH000157, Wiley Online Library on [11/01/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
                                    JGR: Machine Learning and Computation                                                              10.1029/2024JH000157




Figure 19. The original recordings of the Z component received from teleseismic event 73 shown in black lines in panel (a), following a band‐pass filter (0.01–0.25 Hz).
The waveforms after filtering out frequencies below 0.25 Hz and then applying the same band‐pass filter (0.01–0.25 Hz) illustrated in blue lines in panel (a). The
predicted results of the filtered waveforms without low‐frequency components below 0.25 Hz, followed by the same band‐pass filter (0.01–0.25 Hz), represented by red
lines in panels (a). The other figures carry explanatory notes consistent with Figure 18.

                                          (e). From the figures, we can see that in the frequency range below 10 Hz, the input test data exhibit random
                                          fluctuations in the amplitude spectrum due to noise contamination. However, our framework successfully
                                          removes these noise‐induced artifacts and effectively extends the low‐frequency components. We can clearly see
                                          that frequencies below 10 Hz have been restored. Also, Figure 22 illustrates the comparisons of seismograms at
                                          horizontal positions x = 0.3 km and x = 3.5 km among the filtered, noisy input, and original data. We can observe
                                          that our method effectively reconstructs the phase and amplitude of the noisy data, efficiently removing noise and
                                          contributing to a waveform matching the original data.
                                          Furthermore, we make comparisons to the FWI results with different data sets, as shown in Figure 23. Compared
                                          to the inversion result (Figure 23b) of the noisy data missing the low‐frequency information, the result
                                          (Figure 23c) of the predicted data after low‐frequency extrapolation can recover the subsurface velocity favor-
                                          ably, especially in the middle area with adequate acquisition coverage. Figure 24 displays the corresponding
                                          profiles at x = 2.5, 3.5, and 4.5 km. Obviously, the predicted inversion results (red line) match the true velocity
                                          (blue line) very well, while the noisy inversion results have a large error.


                                          4.3. The Role of the Amplitude Spectrum Loss
                                          In the process of optimizing network training, we introduce an amplitude spectrum loss to work alongside the data
                                          loss in measuring the misfit between the network output and the pseudo‐labels. We do this to ensure the network
                                          focuses not only on data reconstruction but also on maintaining consistency in the frequency domain, as our goal
                                          is to effectively recover low‐frequency components. Integrating an amplitude spectrum loss compels the network
                                          to more accurately capture frequency characteristics during training.
                                          Consequently, a pertinent question arises: how do we adjust the weights of the data and frequency losses? To
                                          address this issue, we conduct a test to compare how different hyperparameter ξ settings influence the low‐
                                          frequency extrapolation performance of our method. We employ the same training configuration as in Sec-
                                          tion 3.1, with the sole difference being the ϵ is set to 0, 0.001, 0.01, 0.1, and 1, where 0 corresponds to using only


CHENG ET AL.                                                                                                                                                   25 of 32
                                                                                                                                                                                 29935210, 2024, 3, Downloaded from https://agupubs.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1029/2024JH000157, Wiley Online Library on [11/01/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
                                      JGR: Machine Learning and Computation                                                                 10.1029/2024JH000157




Figure 20. Testing the capability of our method to simultaneously restore low‐frequency components and denoise the noisy data with missing low frequencies: (a) the
mimic observed seismogram generated with the true velocity model, (b, e) are the test data missing low frequencies below 10 Hz but containing noise with a level of 15
and 30, respectively, (c, f) correspond the network's prediction results to (b) and (e), respectively, (d, g) are the residuals between their prediction results and the mimic
observed seismogram (a), respectively.



CHENG ET AL.                                                                                                                                                         26 of 32
                                                                                                                                                                       29935210, 2024, 3, Downloaded from https://agupubs.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1029/2024JH000157, Wiley Online Library on [11/01/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
                                   JGR: Machine Learning and Computation                                                            10.1029/2024JH000157




Figure 21. The amplitude spectrum comparison at different horizontal distances: (a) x = 0.3 km, (b) x = 1 km, (c) x = 2 km, (d) x = 3 km, (e) x = 3.5 km, and
(f) x = 4 km. The test input data lack frequency components below 10 Hz and contain random noise with a noise level of 30.

                                         the data loss. To quantitatively assess the low‐frequency extrapolation performance, we use the MAE metric to
                                         measure the discrepancy between the prediction and original simulated data. The MAE metrics for networks
                                         trained with different ϵ settings are displayed in Table 1. It demonstrates that incorporating the amplitude
                                         spectrum loss contributes to the enhanced performance in low‐frequency extrapolation. For example, the network
                                         trained with setting ϵ = 0.01 achieves better performance in recovering low‐frequency components than that using
                                         only data loss, as evidenced by a lower MAE metric.

                                         However, it is crucial to recognize that careful setting of the hyperparameter ϵ is necessary, as excessively high
                                         values can lead to a decline in network performance. For example, compared to using only data loss, the
                                         hyperparameter settings of ϵ = 0.1 and ϵ = 1 result in poorer low‐frequency recovery. Based on our experience,
                                         we find that a hyperparameter setting of ϵ = 0.01 demonstrates the robustness across various data sets,




                                         Figure 22. Comparison of seismograms between the predicted, the input, and original recordings at different horizontal
                                         locations: (a) x = 0.3 km and (b) x = 3.5 km. The test input data lack frequency components below 10 Hz and contain random
                                         noise with a noise level of 30.


CHENG ET AL.                                                                                                                                                27 of 32
                                                                                                                                                                   29935210, 2024, 3, Downloaded from https://agupubs.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1029/2024JH000157, Wiley Online Library on [11/01/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
                                     JGR: Machine Learning and Computation                                                          10.1029/2024JH000157




Figure 23. (a) The initial velocity model. Inversion results of (b) the data with a noise level of 30 and (c) the predicted data.

                                           consistently enhancing low‐frequency extrapolation performance compared to using data loss alone. Therefore,
                                           we recommend setting this parameter to 0.01, as adopted in our numerical examples.

                                           From the examples on synthetic and field data, we realized that the extrapolation to low frequencies is dependent
                                           on the distribution of energy along the frequency axis in the original data and specifically the value of the peak
                                           frequency. Specifically, if the amplitudes in the LessLow is higher compared to the Low, the network will learn to
                                           increase the amplitude in the extrapolation. This is what was experienced in the Marmousi data where the peak
                                           frequency of the Ricker wavelet was around 15 Hz. On the other hand, the Australian field data included high
                                           amplitudes within the low frequency range on the original data (see Figure 25), and as a result, the extrapolation to
                                           low frequencies maintained the amplitude, which explains our ability to map to very low frequencies for the real
                                           data, as compared to the Marmousi example.




Figure 24. Profiles at different horizontal distances: (a) x = 2.5 km, (b) x = 3.5 km, and (c) x = 4.5 km.


CHENG ET AL.                                                                                                                                           28 of 32
                                                                                                                                                                     29935210, 2024, 3, Downloaded from https://agupubs.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1029/2024JH000157, Wiley Online Library on [11/01/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
                                   JGR: Machine Learning and Computation                                                          10.1029/2024JH000157



 Table 1                                                                       4.4. High‐Pass Filter Setting
 The Comparison of Low‐Frequency Extrapolation Performance Using               Our method draws inspiration from the Noisier2Noise concept, where we
 Different Hyperparameter ϵ, Where the Mean Absolute Error (MAE) Metric
 Has Been Used to Measure the Misfit Between the Prediction and the            create input data that lack even more low‐frequency components by applying
 Original Simulated Data                                                       a high‐pass filter to the pseudo‐label data. In the process of applying this high‐
                                                                               pass filter, we need to provide a range for high‐pass cutoff frequencies. It is
 Hyperparameter setting     Cutoff 5 Hz      Cutoff 10 Hz      Cutoff 15 Hz
                                                                               important to emphasize that the cutoff frequencies range is not arbitrarily set;
 ϵ=0                         0.000556          0.000357         0.000251       it involves a certain trick. We will share insights on setting the cutoff fre-
 ϵ = 0.001                   0.000541          0.000325         0.000207       quency range, which can aid in enhancing the network's low‐frequency
 ϵ = 0.01                    0.000486          0.000286         0.000198       extrapolation performance.
 ϵ = 0.1                     0.000951          0.000818         0.000788       First, we need to analyze the frequency distribution range of the seismic data
 ϵ=1                         0.000619          0.000473         0.000217       we have, as this will provide the prior knowledge required for setting the high‐
                                                                               pass filter. Taking the synthetic data test in Section 3.1 as an example, we can
                                                                               determine the range of low frequencies missing in the original data to be
                                          5∼15 Hz by plotting the amplitude spectrum curve. Subsequently, during the warm‐up phase, our experience in
                                          setting the cutoff frequency range is guided by the principle that the maximum cutoff frequency should not exceed
                                          twice the highest missing frequency, and the minimum cutoff frequency should be slightly above the lowest
                                          missing frequency. Therefore, as observed, in Section 3.1, we set the filtering cutoff frequency range for the
                                          pseudo‐labels to 6∼30 Hz during the warm‐up phase.

                                          In the IDR phase, the optimal approach is to gradually increase the upper limit of the filter cutoff frequency while
                                          keeping the lower limit consistent with the lowest frequency missing in the original seismic data. For example, in
                                          Section 3.1, the range of the filter cutoff frequency for the initial 50 epochs varied randomly between 5 and 7 Hz.
                                          Then, every 50 epochs, we increased the maximum filter cutoff frequency by 2 Hz. Once the maximum filter
                                          cutoff frequency aligned with the highest frequency missing in the original seismic data, we maintained this range
                                          for training until the predefined maximum training epochs. The rationale behind this is our intention to pro-
                                          gressively enhance the network's low‐frequency extrapolation performance. For example, extending the low‐
                                          frequency range of data missing frequencies below 10 Hz is simpler compared to data missing frequencies
                                          below 5 Hz. Hence, we aim for the network to commence learning from these simpler tasks and then progressively
                                          increase the difficulty during training by incorporating data missing more low frequencies. This approach to
                                          learning is more stable and significantly improves the network's low‐frequency extrapolation performance.

                                          Here, we present an example to validate the effectiveness of this training strategy. Compared to Section 3.1, we
                                          only modify the settings of the filter cutoff frequency range. Specifically, in the IDR phase, we abandoned the
                                          gradually increasing cutoff frequency range setting strategy used in Section 3.1 (referred to as Strategy 1) and
                                          instead, directly set the cutoff frequency range to 5∼15 Hz (referred to as Strategy 2). We compare the predictions
                                          of the network models at different training epochs on three test data, each missing frequencies below 5, 10, and
                                          15 Hz against the network trained in Section 3.1. Figure 26 displays the MAE metrics of the networks using two
                                                                                different cutoff frequency setting strategies on three test data. The panels a, b,
                                                                                and c correspond to the seismic data missing frequencies below 5, 10, and
                                                                                15 Hz, respectively. It is evident that the network employing Strategy 1 shows
                                                                                gradually improving performance as the training epochs increase. In contrast,
                                                                                the network using Strategy 2 seems to exhibit a declining performance trend
                                                                                on all three test data, indicating non‐convergent characteristics. These results
                                                                                highlight the effectiveness of our proposed training strategy, proving its
                                                                                significant enhancement in training stability and low‐frequency extrapolation
                                                                                capabilities of the network.

                                                                               5. Conclusion
                                                                               We developed a novel neural network (NN)‐based seismic low‐frequency
                                                                               extrapolation method in a SSL fashion. Under our framework, the NN
                                                                               sequentially undergoes two stages: warm‐up and IDR. In the warm‐up stage,
                                                                               we construct a lesslow‐low data set using the original observed data, which
                                                                               lack low‐frequency components as pseudo‐labels. The input data are obtained
Figure 25. The amplitude spectrum for original seismic data.                   by applying a high‐pass filter to these pseudo‐labels, resulting in a further loss


CHENG ET AL.                                                                                                                                            29 of 32
                                                                                                                                                                                                29935210, 2024, 3, Downloaded from https://agupubs.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1029/2024JH000157, Wiley Online Library on [11/01/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
                                        JGR: Machine Learning and Computation                                                                         10.1029/2024JH000157




Figure 26. Comparison of the low‐frequency extrapolation performance of networks trained with different high‐pass filter cutoff frequency setting strategies. Strategy 1
denotes gradually increasing the upper limit of the cutoff frequency during the iterative data refinement (IDR) stage, while Strategy 2 involves setting a fixed cutoff
frequency range. The panels (a)–(c) correspond to the mean absolute error (MAE) metrics of networks trained with these two strategies on three test data, each missing
frequencies below 5, 10, and 15 Hz, respectively.

                                            of low‐frequency content. The NN rapidly warms up on this constructed data set, initially extracting the original
                                            data's frequency characteristics and providing a degree of low‐frequency extension capability. During the IDR
                                            stage, we update the lesslow‐low data set in each training epoch, where the pseudo‐labels are derived from the
                                            network's predictions of the original observed data from the previous epoch, and the input data are created by
                                            applying a high‐pass filter to these predicted pseudo‐labels. Continually updating the training data set allows us to
                                            gradually reduce the frequency information bias between the network's predictions and the ideal ground truth,
                                            thereby steadily enhancing the network's low‐frequency extrapolation performance. We validated our method's
                                            effectiveness on both synthetic and field data in exploration circumstances. The results demonstrated that our
                                            method effectively extrapolates low‐frequency components, enabling us to address the main challenge of FWI,
                                            specifically cycle‐skipping. Further testing on earthquake seismogram demonstrated our method's applicability to
                                            extending ultralow‐frequency content in large‐scale collected data.

                                            Data Availability Statement
                                            The code and data in this research are available at https://github.com/DeepWave‐KAUST/SSL‐Lowfrequency‐
                                            extrapolation (Cheng, 2024).


Acknowledgments                             References
This publication is based on work
supported by the King Abdullah University   Alkhalifah, T., Wang, H., & Ovcharenko, O. (2022). Mlreal: Bridging the gap between training on synthetic data and real data applications in
of Science and Technology (KAUST). The        machine learning. Artificial Intelligence in Geosciences, 3, 101–114. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.aiig.2022.09.002
authors thank the DeepWave sponsors for     Alkhalifah, T., & Wu, Z. (2016). Multiscattering inversion for low‐model wavenumbers. Geophysics, 81(6), R417–R428. https://doi.org/10.1190/
supporting this research. They also thank     geo2015‐0650.1
CGG for sharing the field seismic data.     Anderson, J. E., Tan, L., & Wang, D. (2012). Time‐reversal checkpointing methods for RTM and FWI. Geophysics, 77(4), S93–S103. https://doi.
This work utilized the resources of the       org/10.1190/geo2011‐0114.1
Supercomputing Laboratory at KAUST in       Araya‐Polo, M., Jennings, J., Adler, A., & Dahlke, T. (2018). Deep‐learning tomography. The Leading Edge, 37(1), 58–66. https://doi.org/10.
Thuwal, Saudi Arabia.                         1190/tle37010058.1
                                            Ben‐Hadj‐Ali, H., Operto, S., & Virieux, J. (2011). An efficient frequency‐domain full waveform inversion method using simultaneous encoded
                                              sources. Geophysics, 76(4), R109–R124. https://doi.org/10.1190/1.3581357
                                            Boonyasiriwat, C., Valasek, P., Routh, P., Cao, W., Schuster, G. T., & Macy, B. (2009). An efficient multiscale method for time‐domain
                                              waveform tomography. Geophysics, 74(6), WCC59–WCC68. https://doi.org/10.1190/1.3151869
                                            Bunks, C., Saleck, F. M., Zaleski, S., & Chavent, G. (1995). Multiscale seismic waveform inversion. Geophysics, 60(5), 1457–1473. https://doi.
                                              org/10.1190/1.1443880
                                            Cheng, S. (2024). A data source file for review paper “A self‐supervised learning framework for seismic low‐frequency extrapolation”. Zenodo.
                                              https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.10500568
                                            Cheng, S., Cheng, Z., Jiang, C., Mao, W., & Zhang, Q. (2023). An effective self‐supervised learning method for various seismic noise attenuation.
                                              arXiv Preprint. arXiv:2311.02193.



CHENG ET AL.                                                                                                                                                                     30 of 32
                                                                                                                                                                       29935210, 2024, 3, Downloaded from https://agupubs.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1029/2024JH000157, Wiley Online Library on [11/01/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
               JGR: Machine Learning and Computation                                                                        10.1029/2024JH000157


                 Cheng, S., Harsuko, R., & Alkhalifah, T. (2024). Meta‐processing: A robust framework for multi‐tasks seismic processing. Surveys in Geophysics,
                    1–36. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10712‐024‐09837‐9
                 Cheng, S., Shi, X., Mao, W., Alkhalifah, T., Yang, T., Liu, Y., & Sun, H. (2023). Elastic seismic imaging enhancement of sparse 4C ocean‐bottom
                    node data using deep learning. IEEE Transactions on Geoscience and Remote Sensing, 61, 1–14. https://doi.org/10.1109/tgrs.2023.3275614
                 Chi, B., Dong, L., & Liu, Y. (2015). Correlation‐based reflection full‐waveform inversion. Geophysics, 80(4), R189–R202. https://doi.org/10.
                    1190/geo2014‐0345.1
                 Choi, Y., & Alkhalifah, T. (2011). Source‐independent time‐domain waveform inversion using convolved wavefields: Application to the encoded
                    multisource waveform inversion. Geophysics, 76(5), R125–R134. https://doi.org/10.1190/geo2010‐0210.1
                 Choi, Y., & Alkhalifah, T. (2012). Application of multi‐source waveform inversion to marine streamer data using the global correlation norm.
                    Geophysical Prospecting, 60(4), 748–758. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1365‐2478.2012.01079.x
                 Du, M., Cheng, S., & Mao, W. (2022). Deep‐learning‐based seismic variable‐size velocity model building. IEEE Geoscience and Remote Sensing
                    Letters, 19, 1–5. https://doi.org/10.1109/lgrs.2022.3204747
                 Fabien‐Ouellet, G. (2020). Low‐frequency generation and denoising with recursive convolutional neural networks. In SEG technical program
                    expanded abstracts 2020 (pp. 870–874). Society of Exploration Geophysicists.
                 Fang, J., Zhou, H., Elita Li, Y., Zhang, Q., Wang, L., Sun, P., & Zhang, J. (2020). Data‐driven low‐frequency signal recovery using deep‐learning
                    predictions in full‐waveform inversion. Geophysics, 85(6), A37–A43. https://doi.org/10.1190/geo2020‐0159.1
                 Fichtner, A., Trampert, J., Cupillard, P., Saygin, E., Taymaz, T., Capdeville, Y., & Villasenor, A. (2013). Multiscale full waveform inversion.
                    Geophysical Journal International, 194(1), 534–556. https://doi.org/10.1093/gji/ggt118
                 Gao, Z., Pan, Z., Gao, J., & Wu, R. (2019). Frequency controllable envelope operator and its application in multiscale full‐waveform inversion.
                    IEEE Transactions on Geoscience and Remote Sensing, 57(2), 683–699. https://doi.org/10.1109/TGRS.2018.2859219
                 Guo, Q., & Alkhalifah, T. (2017). Elastic reflection‐based waveform inversion with a nonlinear approach. Geophysics, 82(6), R309–R321. https://
                    doi.org/10.1190/geo2016‐0407.1
                 Ha, W., & Shin, C. (2012). Laplace‐domain full‐waveform inversion of seismic data lacking low‐frequency information. Geophysics, 77(5),
                    R199–R206. https://doi.org/10.1190/geo2011‐0411.1
                 Harsuko, R., & Alkhalifah, T. A. (2022). Storseismic: A new paradigm in deep learning for seismic processing. IEEE Transactions on Geoscience
                    and Remote Sensing, 60, 1–15. https://doi.org/10.1109/tgrs.2022.3216660
                 Hu, W., Jin, Y., Wu, X., & Chen, J. (2021). Progressive transfer learning for low‐frequency data prediction in full‐waveform inversion.
                    Geophysics, 86(4), R369–R382. https://doi.org/10.1190/geo2020‐0598.1
                 Jin, P., Zhang, X., Chen, Y., Huang, S. X., Liu, Z., & Lin, Y. (2021). Unsupervised learning of full‐waveform inversion: Connecting CNN and
                    partial differential equation in a loop. arXiv Preprint. arXiv:2110.07584.
                 Jin, Y., Hu, W., Wang, S., Zi, Y., Wu, X., & Chen, J. (2021). Efficient progressive transfer learning for full‐waveform inversion with extrapolated
                    low‐frequency reflection seismic data. IEEE Transactions on Geoscience and Remote Sensing, 60, 1–10. https://doi.org/10.1109/tgrs.2021.
                    3129810
                 Kim, Y., Shin, C., Calandra, H., & Min, D.‐J. (2013). An algorithm for 3D acoustic time‐Laplace‐Fourier‐domain hybrid full waveform inversion.
                    Geophysics, 78(4), R151–R166. https://doi.org/10.1190/geo2012‐0155.1
                 Li, Q., Zhang, Q., Du, Q., & Cheng, S. (2022). Well‐guided multisource elastic full‐waveform inversion. IEEE Transactions on Geoscience and
                    Remote Sensing, 60, 1–14. https://doi.org/10.1109/tgrs.2022.3200943
                 Li, S., Liu, B., Ren, Y., Chen, Y., Yang, S., Wang, Y., & Jiang, P. (2020). Deep‐learning inversion of seismic data. IEEE Transactions on
                    Geoscience and Remote Sensing, 58(3), 2135–2149. https://doi.org/10.1109/TGRS.2019.2953473
                 Lin, Y., Theiler, J., & Wohlberg, B. (2023). Physics‐guided data‐driven seismic inversion: Recent progress and future opportunities in full‐
                    waveform inversion. IEEE Signal Processing Magazine, 40(1), 115–133. https://doi.org/10.1109/msp.2022.3217658
                 Loshchilov, I., & Hutter, F. (2017). Decoupled weight decay regularization. arXiv Preprint. arXiv:1711.05101.
                 Luo, J., & Wu, R.‐S. (2015). Seismic envelope inversion: Reduction of local minima and noise resistance. Geophysical Prospecting, 63(3), 597–
                    614. https://doi.org/10.1111/1365‐2478.12208
                 Ma, Y., & Hale, D. (2013). Wave‐equation reflection traveltime inversion with dynamic warping and full‐waveform inversion. Geophysics, 78(6),
                    R223–R233. https://doi.org/10.1190/geo2013‐0004.1
                 Moran, N., Schmidt, D., Zhong, Y., & Coady, P. (2020). Noisier2Noise: Learning to denoise from unpaired noisy data. In Proceedings of the ieee/
                    cvf conference on computer vision and pattern recognition (pp. 12064–12072).
                 Mousavi, S. M., & Beroza, G. C. (2022). Deep‐learning seismology. Science, 377(6607), eabm4470. https://doi.org/10.1126/science.abm4470
                 Nakayama, S., & Blacquière, G. (2021). Machine‐learning‐based data recovery and its contribution to seismic acquisition: Simultaneous
                    application of deblending, trace reconstruction, and low‐frequency extrapolation. Geophysics, 86(2), P13–P24. https://doi.org/10.1190/
                    geo2020‐0303.1
                 Ovcharenko, O., Kazei, V., Alkhalifah, T. A., & Peter, D. B. (2022). Multi‐task learning for low‐frequency extrapolation and elastic model
                    building from seismic data. IEEE Transactions on Geoscience and Remote Sensing, 60, 1–17. https://doi.org/10.1109/tgrs.2022.3185794
                 Ovcharenko, O., Kazei, V., Kalita, M., Peter, D., & Alkhalifah, T. (2019). Deep learning for low‐frequency extrapolation from multioffset seismic
                    data. Geophysics, 84(6), R989–R1001. https://doi.org/10.1190/geo2018‐0884.1
                 Ovcharenko, O., Kazei, V., Peter, D., & Alkhalifah, T. (2017). Neural network based low‐frequency data extrapolation. In 3rd SEG FWI
                    workshop: What are we getting?
                 Ren, Y., Liu, B., Yang, S., Li, D., & Jiang, P. (2021). Seismic data inversion with acquisition adaptive convolutional neural network for geologic
                    forward prospecting in tunnels. Geophysics, 86(5), R659–R670. https://doi.org/10.1190/geo2020‐0370.1
                 Ren, Z., & Liu, Y. (2015). Elastic full‐waveform inversion using the second‐generation wavelet and an adaptive‐operator‐length scheme.
                    Geophysics, 80(4), R155–R173. https://doi.org/10.1190/geo2014‐0516.1
                 Ronneberger, O., Fischer, P., & Brox, T. (2015). U‐net: Convolutional networks for biomedical image segmentation. In Medical Image
                    Computing and Computer‐Assisted Intervention–MICCAI 2015: 18th International conference, Munich, Germany, October 5–9, 2015, Pro-
                    ceedings, Part III 18 (pp. 234–241).
                 Sun, B., & Alkhalifah, T. (2019). The application of an optimal transport to a preconditioned data matching function for robust waveform
                    inversion. Geophysics, 84(6), R923–R945. https://doi.org/10.1190/geo2018‐0413.1
                 Sun, H., & Demanet, L. (2018). Low frequency extrapolation with deep learning. In SEG technical program expanded abstracts 2018 (pp. 2011–
                    2015). Society of Exploration Geophysicists.
                 Sun, H., & Demanet, L. (2020). Extrapolated full‐waveform inversion with deep learning. Geophysics, 85(3), R275–R288. https://doi.org/10.
                    1190/geo2019‐0195.1




CHENG ET AL.                                                                                                                                            31 of 32
                                                                                                                                                                        29935210, 2024, 3, Downloaded from https://agupubs.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1029/2024JH000157, Wiley Online Library on [11/01/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
               JGR: Machine Learning and Computation                                                                         10.1029/2024JH000157


                 Sun, H., & Demanet, L. (2021). Deep learning for low‐frequency extrapolation of multicomponent data in elastic FWI. IEEE Transactions on
                   Geoscience and Remote Sensing, 60, 1–11. https://doi.org/10.1109/tgrs.2021.3135790
                 Sun, H., Sun, Y., Nammour, R., Rivera, C., Williamson, P., & Demanet, L. (2023). Learning with real data without real labels: A strategy for
                   extrapolated full‐waveform inversion with field data. Geophysical Journal International, 235(2), 1761–1777. https://doi.org/10.1093/gji/
                   ggad330
                 Tarantola, A. (1984). Inversion of seismic reflection data in the acoustic approximation. Geophysics, 49(8), 1259–1266. https://doi.org/10.1190/1.
                   1441754
                 Tarantola, A. (1986). A strategy for nonlinear elastic inversion of seismic reflection data. Geophysics, 51(10), 1893–1903. https://doi.org/10.1190/
                   1.1442046
                 Virieux, J., & Operto, S. (2009). An overview of full‐waveform inversion in exploration geophysics. Geophysics, 74(6), WCC1–WCC26. https://
                   doi.org/10.1190/1.3238367
                 Wang, G., Wang, S., Song, J., Dong, C., & Zhang, M. (2018). Elastic reflection traveltime inversion with decoupled wave equation. Geophysics,
                   83(5), R463–R474. https://doi.org/10.1190/geo2017‐0631.1
                 Wang, M., Xu, S., & Zhou, H. (2020). Self‐supervised learning for low frequency extension of seismic data. In SEG technical program expanded
                   abstracts 2020 (pp. 1501–1505). Society of Exploration Geophysicists.
                 Wang, Z., Liu, G., Du, J., Li, C., & Qi, J. (2022). Low‐frequency extrapolation of prestack viscoacoustic seismic data based on dense con-
                   volutional network. IEEE Transactions on Geoscience and Remote Sensing, 60, 1–13. https://doi.org/10.1109/tgrs.2022.3197231
                 Warner, M., & Guasch, L. (2016). Adaptive waveform inversion: Theory. Geophysics, 81(6), R429–R445. https://doi.org/10.1190/geo2015‐
                   0387.1
                 Wu, R.‐S., Luo, J., & Wu, B. (2014). Seismic envelope inversion and modulation signal model. Geophysics, 79(3), WA13–WA24. https://doi.org/
                   10.1190/geo2013‐0294.1
                 Wu, X., Liang, L., Shi, Y., & Fomel, S. (2019). FaultSEG3D: Using synthetic data sets to train an end‐to‐end convolutional neural network for 3D
                   seismic fault segmentation. Geophysics, 84(3), IM35–IM45. https://doi.org/10.1190/geo2018‐0646.1
                 Wu, Y., & Lin, Y. (2019). Inversionnet: An efficient and accurate data‐driven full waveform inversion. IEEE Transactions on Computational
                   Imaging, 6, 419–433. https://doi.org/10.1109/tci.2019.2956866
                 Wu, Z., & Alkhalifah, T. (2017). Efficient scattering‐angle enrichment for a nonlinear inversion of the background and perturbations components
                   of a velocity model. Geophysical Journal International, 210(3), 1981–1992. https://doi.org/10.1093/gji/ggx283
                 Xu, S., Wang, D., Chen, F., Zhang, Y., & Lambare, G. (2012). Full waveform inversion for reflected seismic data. In 74th EAGE conference and
                   exhibition incorporating EUROPEC 2012 (p. cp–293).
                 Yang, F., & Ma, J. (2019). Deep‐learning inversion: A next‐generation seismic velocity model building method. Geophysics, 84(4), R583–R599.
                   https://doi.org/10.1190/geo2018‐0249.1
                 Yang, S., Alkhalifah, T., Ren, Y., Liu, B., Li, Y., & Jiang, P. (2023). Well‐log information‐assisted high‐resolution waveform inversion based on
                   deep learning. IEEE Geoscience and Remote Sensing Letters, 20, 1–5. https://doi.org/10.1109/lgrs.2023.3234211
                 Yang, Y., & Engquist, B. (2018). Analysis of optimal transport and related misfit functions in full‐waveform inversion. Geophysics, 83(1), A7–
                   A12. https://doi.org/10.1190/geo2017‐0264.1
                 Yang, Y., Engquist, B., Sun, J., & Hamfeldt, B. F. (2018). Application of optimal transport and the quadratic Wasserstein metric to full‐waveform
                   inversion. Geophysics, 83(1), R43–R62. https://doi.org/10.1190/geo2016‐0663.1
                 Yao, G., Wu, D., & Wang, S.‐X. (2020). A review on reflection‐waveform inversion. Petroleum Science, 17(2), 334–351. https://doi.org/10.1007/
                   s12182‐020‐00431‐3
                 Yao, J., & Wang, Y. (2022). Building a full‐waveform inversion starting model from wells with dynamic time warping and convolutional neural
                   networks. Geophysics, 87(2), R223–R230. https://doi.org/10.1190/geo2021‐0168.1
                 Yong, P., Brossier, R., Métivier, L., & Virieux, J. (2023). Localized adaptive waveform inversion: Theory and numerical verification. Geophysical
                   Journal International, 233(2), 1055–1080. https://doi.org/10.1093/gji/ggac496
                 Yu, S., Ma, J., & Wang, W. (2019). Deep learning for denoising. Geophysics, 84(6), V333–V350. https://doi.org/10.1190/geo2018‐0668.1
                 Zhang, Q., Mao, W., Zhou, H., Zhang, H., & Chen, Y. (2018). Hybrid‐domain simultaneous‐source full waveform inversion without crosstalk
                   noise. Geophysical Journal International, 215(3), 1659–1681. https://doi.org/10.1093/gji/ggy366
                 Zhang, Q., Zhou, H., Li, Q., Chen, H., & Wang, J. (2016). Robust source‐independent elastic full‐waveform inversion in the time domain.
                   Geophysics, 81(2), R29–R44. https://doi.org/10.1190/geo2015‐0073.1
                 Zhang, Q., Zhou, H., Zuo, A., Xia, M., & Wang, J. (2014). Efficient boundary storage strategy for 3D elastic FWI in time domain. In SEG
                   technical program expanded abstracts 2014 (pp. 1142–1146). Society of Exploration Geophysicists.
                 Zhang, W., & Gao, J. (2021). Deep‐learning full‐waveform inversion using seismic migration images. IEEE Transactions on Geoscience and
                   Remote Sensing, 60, 1–18. https://doi.org/10.1109/tgrs.2021.3062688
                 Zhang, Z.‐D., & Alkhalifah, T. (2019). Local‐crosscorrelation elastic full‐waveform inversion. Geophysics, 84(6), R897–R908. https://doi.org/10.
                   1190/geo2018‐0660.1




CHENG ET AL.                                                                                                                                             32 of 32
